
1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Oct;71(4):649-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.05.010. Epub 
2014 Jun 25.

Comparative performance of psoriatic arthritis screening tools in patients with
psoriasis in European/North American dermatology clinics.

Mease PJ(1), Gladman DD(2), Helliwell P(3), Khraishi MM(4), Fuiman J(5), Bananis 
E(5), Alvarez D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington; University of Washington School
of Medicine, Seattle, Washington. Electronic address: pmease@philipmease.com.
(2)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)University of Leeds,
Leeds, United Kingdom. (4)Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's,
Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. (5)Specialty Care, Pfizer Inc, Collegeville,
Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: General practitioners/dermatologists may be aware of musculoskeletal 
symptoms in patients with psoriasis but may have difficulty accurately detecting 
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate 3 PsA screening questionnaires-the Psoriasis and
Arthritis Screening Questionnaire (PASQ), Psoriasis Epidemiology Screening Tool
(PEST), and Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Screen (ToPAS)-based on rheumatologist
assessment in patients with psoriasis.
METHODS: Consecutive unselected patients with psoriasis, initially evaluated by
dermatologists for plaque psoriasis, were randomized to receive 1 of 3
questionnaires. Patients were subsequently evaluated by rheumatologists to
establish/exclude clinical PsA diagnosis. Using clinical PsA diagnosis as the
standard for comparison, questionnaire accuracy was assessed by calculating
sensitivity/specificity and positive/negative predictive values.
RESULTS: Of 949 patients with psoriasis evaluated by rheumatologists, 285 (30%)
received a clinical diagnosis of PsA (95% confidence interval 27%-33%). Probable 
PsA was detected in 45.1%, 43.0%, and 42.9% of patients using PASQ, PEST, and
ToPAS, respectively. Sensitivity ranged from 0.67 to 0.84; specificity, 0.64 to
0.75; positive predictive value, 0.43 to 0.60; and negative predictive value,
0.83 to 0.91.
LIMITATIONS: Not all patients completed all questionnaires; lack of standardized 
diagnostic criteria introduced possible bias.
CONCLUSION: PASQ, PEST, and ToPAS are useful screening tools that can help
dermatologists identify patients without PsA and patients with possible PsA who
may benefit from rheumatologist assessment.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24974240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMC Dermatol. 2014 Aug 5;14:14. doi: 10.1186/1471-5945-14-14.

Employment is maintained and sick days decreased in psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis
patients with etanercept treatment.

Boggs RL(1), Kárpáti S, Li W, Williams T, Pedersen R, Mallbris L, Gniadecki R.

Author information: 
(1)Formerly of Pfizer Inc,, 3921 Glenlake Garden Drive, Raleigh, NC 27612, USA.
bobboggs.nc@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) impair quality of life,
including reduction in employment or job duties. The PRESTA (Psoriasis Randomized
Etanercept STudy in Patients with Psoriatic Arthritis) study, a randomized,
double-blind, two-dose trial, examined the efficacy of etanercept treatment in
patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis and PsA and the main results
have been presented previously. This analysis examined employment status, job
duties and sick days, pre-defined endpoints in PRESTA, among this patient
population.
METHODS: Participants (N=752) were randomized to receive etanercept 50 mg twice
weekly (BIW; n=379) or 50 mg once weekly (QW; n=373) for 12 weeks by subcutaneous
injection. All participants then received open-label etanercept 50 mg QW for 12
additional weeks, while remaining blinded to the randomization. A
pharmacoeconomic questionnaire was administered at baseline, week 12 and week 24 
of treatment. The questionnaire included employment status and changing job
responsibilities and sick time taken due to psoriasis or PsA. The statistical
methods included analysis of covariance, t-test, Fisher's exact test and
McNemar's test. Last-observation-carried-forward imputation was used for missing 
data.
RESULTS: Employment was at least maintained from baseline to week 24 in both dose
groups (56% [BIW/QW] and 60% [QW/QW] at baseline, 61% and 60%, respectively, at
week 24). Among employed participants, the proportion of patients whose job
responsibilities changed due to PsA decreased significantly from baseline to week
24 (17-23% to 5-8%; p<0.01). Similar results were seen with job responsibility
changes due to psoriasis (11-14% to 4%; p<0.01). The number of monthly sick days 
also decreased from baseline to week 24 (2.4 days for both treatment groups to
0.7 (BIW/QW) and 1.1 (QW/QW); p≤0.03 for each). No significant differences
between the treatment groups were observed for any economic endpoint at any time 
point.
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis and PsA,
etanercept treatment resulted in reducing job responsibility changes due to
disease and in reducing sick time. Effective treatment of psoriasis and PsA may
reduce missed work days.

PMCID: PMC4147874
PMID: 25091090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Dermatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;25(1):57-63. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2014.2449.

Prevalence and clinical features of psoriatic arthritis in psoriasis patients in 
Spain. Limitations of PASE as a screening tool.

López Estebaránz JL(1), Zarco-Montejo P(2), Samaniego ML(3), García-Calvo C(4);
PREVAL Study Group.

Collaborators: Pérez Ferriols A, Rueda A, Almeida P, Rosas Romero A, Hernandez J,
Zaida Hernandez M, Lujan D, Martel R, Noelia Hernandez M, Borrego L, Girona E,
Hernández Beriain JA, Batista Perdomo D, Machín S, Suarez J, Brito Suarez M,
Feliciano Divasson L, Pujol C, Escutia B, Naranco M, Blanes FA, Barbeito E, Peña 
García A, Tornero Ramos C, Gimeno Carpio E, Castellano Cuesta JA, Quecedo
Estebanez E, Velasco Pastor M, Millán Parrilla F, San Juan VP, Ruiz Genao D,
Almodovar R, Quirós J, Mazzucchelli R, Roustan Gullón G, Sanz Sanz J, de Hierro
H, Hernanz JM, Navío T, Cebrián L, Schoendor Ortega C, Santos Rey J, Sánchez
Estella J, Martínez Gonzalez O, Cabezas Lefler JA, Rubio Flores C, Muñoz S, Díaz 
Díaz R, Cobo T, Gallego MÁ, Cruz Valenciano A, Aguilar A, Garcia Cano I,
Fernández E, Houmani H, Sánchez-Largo Uceda E, Pérez Gómez A, Gilaberte Y,
Rosselló Pardo R, Escalas J, Espadaler L, Rex Caballé J, del Blanco Barnusell J, 
Luelmo J, Gratacós J, Moreno M, Vidal Sarró D, Figuls Poch R, Smandia Domínguez
JA, Fernández Casado A, Peramiquel Fonollosa L, Masferrer i Niubó E, Cerdá
Gabaroi D, Corominas Macías H, Reina Sanz D, Bielsa Marsol I, Olivé A, del Rio R,
Pitarch Grau C, Sidró M, León Y, Marine Hernandez T, Armesto S, Blanco R,
Martínez de Lizarduy I, Galíndez E, Santos Juanes J, Ballina J, Mercedes Alperi
PC, Queiro R, Almeida V, Vesga JC, de la Torre C, Cruz Martínez J, Abalde MT,
Fernandez Diaz L, Sánchez Andrade A, Garcia Morras P, Pinillos Aransay V, García 
I, Aurrecoechea E, Ruiz Carrascosa JC, Camacho Avelino IM, Martín González T,
Ureña Garnica I, Mendiola Fernández MV, García Portales R, Neila Iglesias J,
Garcia MD, González Fernández J, Medina Varo F, Jiménez Puya R, López Montilla
MD, Escudero Ordóñez J, Sanchez Bursón J, Quintana del Olmo J, Martín Walls R,
Ruiz Villaverde R, Ramirez MC, Pérez MJ, Chávez Alvárez A, Salazar Vallinas JM.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosing and initiating treatment of psoriatric arthritis (PsA) as 
early as possible is essential to prevent irreversible joint destruction and poor
clinical outcomes. Dermatologists are uniquely placed to identify early symptoms 
of PsA in psoriasis patients but levels of under- and late-diagnosis remain high.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence and clinical features of PsA in Spanish
psoriatic patients attended by dermatologists and then referred to rheumatologic 
units for PsA diagnosis confirmation.
METHODS: a multicenter, non-interventional, cross-sectional trial conducted at 40
hospitals in Spain. Patients were initially screened for PsA by a dermatologist
based on clinical evaluation and results from the Psoriatic Arthritis Screening
and Evaluation (PASE) Questionnaire. All patients were then evaluated by a
blinded rheumatologist for the presence of PsA using Moll and Wright criteria and
Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis (CASPAR).
RESULTS: Of 375 psoriatic patients enrolled at dermatology units, 28.6% patients 
scored ≥44 in PASE, whereas 32.3% patients screened positive for suspicion of PsA
(clinical evaluation and/or PASE). Correlation of suspicion of PsA by
dermatologists and PASE score was 0.368 (Pearson correlation coefficient).
Following rheumatologic assessment, prevalence of PsA was 22.9% (86/375 patients)
according to Moll and Wright and CASPAR criteria. The correlation of diagnosis of
PsA between dermatologists and rheumatologists was 0.410 (Kappa Index).
CONCLUSIONS: Prevalence of PsA in our study was within the range reported in
other studies. Our analyses found only a moderate correlation in the diagnosis of
PsA between dermatologists and rheumatologists. The screening questionnaire,
PASE, showed a moderate predictive value for the diagnosis of PsA.

PMID: 25333645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Dermatolog Treat. 2015 Feb;26(1):7-15. doi: 10.3109/09546634.2013.860209. Epub 
2013 Nov 27.

Cardiometabolic profile, clinical features, quality of life and treatment
outcomes in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Puig L(1), Strohal R, Husni ME, Tsai TF, Noppakun N, Szumski A, Yang S, Robertson
D, Boggs R, Koenig AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona , Barcelona , Spain .

Cardiometabolic, clinical and quality-of-life (QoL) measures were assessed before
and after etanercept treatment in patients who had moderate-to-severe plaque
psoriasis with and without psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in the PRISTINE trial. Adult
patients were randomized to receive etanercept 50 mg once weekly or twice weekly 
double-blind for 12 weeks; all patients subsequently received etanercept 50 mg
once weekly open-label through week 24. Metabolic syndrome was identified in 44
and 41% of patients with and without PsA, elevated blood pressure in 73 and 56%
(p<0.05) and diabetes in 21 and 9% (p<0.01), respectively. Significant
improvements from baseline in Psoriasis Area Severity Index were observed with
etanercept therapy at all time points over 24 weeks (p<0.001) independent of PsA 
history. At baseline, patients with PsA had worse QoL than patients without PsA. 
After 24 weeks of etanercept, both groups had significant improvement from
baseline in QoL, but the PsA group had greater improvement than that without PsA.
Cardiovascular comorbidities were common in psoriasis patients with and without
PsA, suggesting that clinicians need to be attentive to cardiometabolic
parameters in this population. Worse QoL was demonstrated in PsA versus psoriasis
alone. Regardless of patients' PsA status, treatment with etanercept
significantly improved skin symptoms and QoL measures.

PMID: 24283931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Dermatol. 2014 Oct;53(10):1286-92. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12522. Epub 2014 Jul
11.

Screening for latent tuberculosis infection in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis 
patients in a tuberculosis-endemic country: a comparison of the QuantiFERON®-TB
Gold In-Tube test and tuberculin skin test.

Duman N(1), Ersoy-Evans S, Karadağ O, Aşçıoğlu S, Sener B, Kiraz S, Sahin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Since the introduction of biologic therapies for tuberculosis (TB), screening for
latent TB infection has increased in importance, especially in countries in which
TB is endemic. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of psoriasis on
tuberculin skin test (TST) results and to compare two TB screening tests, the TST
and QuantiFERON(®)-TB Gold In-Tube (QFT-GIT) test, in psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis (PA) patients living in a TB-endemic country (Turkey). This prospective
study included 61 psoriasis and 40 PA patients, and 58 healthy controls.
Demographic data, medical history, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status,
level of education, smoking status, exposure to TB, personal and family histories
of TB, and bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination status were recorded for
all participants. The TST and QFT-GIT were performed in all participants. The
mean ± standard deviation TST indurations in the patient and control groups were 
12.6 ± 6.4 mm and 10.2 ± 6.5 mm, respectively (P = 0.051). The TST positivity
rate was higher in patients than in controls (86.1% vs. 37.9%; P < 0.001),
whereas QFT-GIT positivity did not differ significantly (patients: 20.8%;
controls: 17.2%; P = 0.737). False positive results can lead to unnecessary
prophylactic TB treatment; therefore, the cut-off point for TST positivity in
psoriasis and PA patients should be re-evaluated, or other tests, such as the
QFT-GIT, should be used.

© 2014 The International Society of Dermatology.

PMID: 25039468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Dermatol. 2015 Jun;54(6):715-22. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12645. Epub 2014 Dec 16.

The Worst Itch Numeric Rating Scale for patients with moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis.

Naegeli AN(1), Flood E(2), Tucker J(2), Devlen J(2), Edson-Heredia E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eli Lilly & Co., Indianapolis, IN, USA. (2)Oxford Outcomes, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Plaque psoriasis (PP) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are autoinflammatory chronic 
conditions associated with skin involvement. Pruritus, or itching, is a prevalent
and bothersome symptom in patients with PP and is associated with reduced
health-related quality of life. The Worst Itch Numeric Rating Scale (WI-NRS) has 
been developed as a simple, single item with which to assess the patient-reported
severity of this symptom at its most intense during the previous 24-hour period. 
Qualitative research was undertaken to assess the content validity of the WI-NRS.
Patients with moderate to severe PP and patients with PsA were recruited from
clinical sites in the USA. The qualitative research entailed two-part interviews,
which began with concept elicitation to gain understanding of patients'
experiences of itching, followed by cognitive debriefing of the WI-NRS to assess 
the instrument's understandability, clarity, and degree of appropriateness from
the patient's perspective. Twelve patients with PP and 22 with PsA participated
in the study. Patients reported that itching was an important and relevant
symptom of their psoriatic disease. The WI-NRS was reported to be complete and
easy to understand; the recall period was considered appropriate, the response
scale was familiar, and, overall, the instrument was found to be appropriate for 
assessing itching severity. Patient responses support the content validity of the
WI-NRS. The psychometric properties of the tool will be evaluated in future
studies.

© 2014 The International Society of Dermatology.

PMID: 25515935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015 Mar;72(3):436-439.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.10.026.
Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Efficacy and safety of brodalumab in subpopulations of patients with
difficult-to-treat moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis.

Papp K(1), Menter A(2), Strober B(3), Kricorian G(4), Thompson EH(4), Milmont
CE(4), Nirula A(4), Klekotka P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Probity Medical Research, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. (2)Baylor University
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (3)Probity Medical Research, Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada; University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, Connecticut.
(4)Amgen Inc, Thousand Oaks, California. (5)Amgen Inc, Thousand Oaks, California.
Electronic address: Klekotka@amgen.com.

BACKGROUND: Novel therapies are needed for difficult-to-treat populations of
patients with psoriasis.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the efficacy and safety of the interleukin-17
Receptor A inhibitor brodalumab in patients with psoriasis with or without a
self-reported history of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and with or without a history 
of biologic use.
METHODS: Subset analyses of a phase II, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study of brodalumab in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque
psoriasis were performed. Improvement from baseline in Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index score of 75%, 90%, and 100% at week 12; static Physician Global
Assessment (0/1) score; Dermatology Life Quality Index response; and Psoriasis
Symptom Inventory response were evaluated within subgroups.
RESULTS: Efficacy and quality-of-life measures were generally similar between
subgroups of patients with or without a history of PsA and with or without a
history of biologic use across brodalumab doses and were significantly higher
among patients who received brodalumab 140 mg every 2 weeks or 210 mg every 2
weeks versus placebo.
LIMITATIONS: Differences between subgroups were not compared statistically, PsA
was self-reported, only skin involvement/symptoms were reported, and reasons for 
discontinuation of prior biologic were not captured.
CONCLUSION: Brodalumab is efficacious in patients with psoriasis with or without 
a history of PsA or biologic use.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25553889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Dermatol. 2014 Nov;41(11):974-80. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12653.

Efficacy and safety of ustekinumab treatment in elderly patients with psoriasis.

Hayashi M(1), Umezawa Y, Fukuchi O, Ito T, Saeki H, Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

The ratio of the elderly among psoriasis patients has been increasing. However,
satisfactory long-term management of psoriasis for the elderly is challenging
because of the more frequent presence of comorbidities, and the higher risk of
adverse events from systemic therapeutic agents than younger patients. The use of
ustekinumab (UST) appears to be an appropriate systemic treatment because it is
considered less likely to cause adverse events than other systemic treatments, as
well as necessitating fewer hospital visits. Our retrospective study aimed to
evaluate the efficacy and safety profile of UST in elderly patients with
psoriasis. The study included 24 patients aged over 65 years (range, 65-88 years;
mean, 73.1 years) with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis with impaired quality 
of life. Efficacy and safety were assessed over a 1-year period using the
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) and the Dermatology Live Quality Index
(DLQI). The efficacy was evaluated by the proportion of subjects who achieved
≥75% reduction in PASI score (PASI 75). PASI 75 responses were 56.5% at week 16, 
59.1% at week 28, and 60.0% at week 52. None of the patients developed any
serious infection during the 1-year treatment. The mean DLQI score at weeks 0,
16, 28, and 52 was 7.8 ± 6.0, 2.5 ± 3.4, 1.4 ± 1.7, and 1.2 ± 1.7, respectively. 
UST showed sufficient efficacy for elderly patients with psoriasis without any
serious infection over the 1-year treatment. Our results suggest that UST is the 
preferable agent for the treatment of elderly patients with psoriasis.

© 2014 Japanese Dermatological Association.

PMID: 25346301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. JAMA Dermatol. 2015 Sep;151(9):961-9. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.0718.

Risk of Serious Infection With Biologic and Systemic Treatment of Psoriasis:
Results From the Psoriasis Longitudinal Assessment and Registry (PSOLAR).

Kalb RE(1), Fiorentino DF(2), Lebwohl MG(3), Toole J(4), Poulin Y(5), Cohen
AD(6), Goyal K(7), Fakharzadeh S(7), Calabro S(7), Chevrier M(8), Langholff W(8),
You Y(8), Leonardi CL(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine and Biological Sciences, State
University of New York at Buffalo. (2)Department of Dermatology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (3)Department of
Dermatology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York. (4)Dermadvances
Research, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. (5)Laval University and
Centre de Dermatologique du Quebec Metropolitain, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Siaal Research Center for Family Medicine and Primary Care, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. (7)Janssen Scientific Affairs, LLC, 
Horsham, Pennsylvania. (8)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Horsham and Spring
House, Pennsylvania. (9)Department of Dermatology, Saint Louis University School 
of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri.

IMPORTANCE: The efficacy of treatment for psoriasis must be balanced against
potential adverse events.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of treatment on the risk of serious infections
in patients with psoriasis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A multicenter, longitudinal, disease-based
registry (Psoriasis Longitudinal Assessment and Registry [PSOLAR]) at dermatology
centers. Participants were adult patients with psoriasis who were receiving or
were eligible to receive conventional systemic or biologic agents. The registry
opened on June 20, 2007, and data included herein were collected through August
23, 2013.
EXPOSURES: Patients were prescribed psoriasis therapies as in standard clinical
practice. Patients will be followed for up to 8 years. Data were collected and
serious adverse events (including serious infections) were assessed at regular
intervals.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Cohort characteristics are described based on
evaluation at entry into the registry. The cumulative incidence rates of serious 
infections are reported across treatment cohorts, including ustekinumab,
infliximab, adalimumab, etanercept, and nonbiologics (with or without
methotrexate). A multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazards
regression model was used to identify predictors of the time to the first serious
infection using the nonmethotrexate/nonbiologics cohort as the reference.
RESULTS: Data were analyzed from 11,466 patients with psoriasis (22,311
patient-years). Differences in patient characteristics were found between the
biologics and nonmethotrexate/nonbiologics cohorts (eg, age, sex, body mass
index, and disease characteristics), as well as among the individual biologic
groups (eg, a higher prevalence of psoriatic arthritis in the infliximab cohort).
The cumulative incidence rate of serious infections was 1.45 per 100
patient-years (n = 323) across treatment cohorts, and the rates were 0.83, 1.47, 
1.97, and 2.49 per 100 patient-years in the ustekinumab, etanercept, adalimumab, 
and infliximab cohorts, respectively, and 1.05 and 1.28 per 100 patient-years in 
the nonmethotrexate/nonbiologics and methotrexate/nonbiologics cohorts,
respectively. The most commonly reported types of serious infections across the
registry were pneumonia and cellulitis. Increasing age, diabetes mellitus,
smoking, significant infection history, infliximab exposure, and adalimumab
exposure were each associated with an increased risk of serious infection.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results from PSOLAR suggest a higher risk of serious
infections with adalimumab and infliximab compared with nonmethotrexate and
nonbiologic therapies. No increased risk was observed with ustekinumab or
etanercept.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00508547.

PMID: 25970800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Eur J Dermatol. 2012 Nov-Dec;22(6):762-9. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2012.1863.

Influence of psoriatic arthritis on the efficacy of adalimumab and on the
treatment response of other markers of psoriasis burden: subanalysis of the
BELIEVE study.

Paul C(1), van de Kerkhof P, Puig L, Unnebrink K, Goldblum O, Thaçi D.

Author information: 
(1)Paul Sabatier University and Larrey Hospital, 24 Chemin de Pouvourville, 31000
Toulouse, France. paul.c@chu-toulouse

BACKGROUND: Adalimumab is a fully human anti-TNF monoclonal antibody with
demonstrated efficacy and safety in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis
and psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: This study examined the effect of PsA on adalimumab treatment response
in patients from the Phase IIIb BELIEVE trial (NCT00574249, ClinicalTrials.gov
registry), and response of other markers of disease burden to adalimumab
treatment.
METHODS: In this post hoc analysis, patients with or without a history of PsA and
with moderate to severe psoriasis were randomized to adalimumab plus adjunctive
topical therapy (calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate) or monotherapy
(adalimumab plus matching topical vehicle).
RESULTS: Regardless of baseline PsA, improvement at Week 16 was seen in PASI 75, 
pruritus, PSSI, and DLQI (all patients), and mean NAPSI scores. Patients with PsA
had HAQ improvement at Week 16, and compared to patients without PsA, had higher 
VAS pain scores. This analysis represents the first publication of the influence 
of PsA and PsA plus body weight on patient response to adalimumab, and response
of scalp psoriasis, nail psoriasis, and patient-reported outcomes to adalimumab. 
The incidence of AEs was similar among all patients (62%), those with PsA (65%)
and without PsA (60%). The most common AEs were infections (27%); 4.2% of all
patients reported serious AEs.
CONCLUSION: Adalimumab treatment resulted in comprehensive, clinically relevant
improvements from baseline PsA status, in skin, nails, quality of life, pain and 
pruritus. Despite having more severely affected disease and quality of life,
patients with PsA did not respond to adalimumab significantly differently from
patients without PsA.

PMID: 23178916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Drug Dev Res. 2014 Nov;75 Suppl 1:S73-6. doi: 10.1002/ddr.21202.

Effects of TNF-alpha inhibitors on circulating Th17 cells in patients affected by
severe psoriasis.

Piaserico S(1), Sandini E, Saldan A, Abate D.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, 35128, Padova,
Italy.

Psoriasis was previously considered to be mostly a Th1 cell-related disorder, but
Th17 cell has recently emerged as an important player in the pathogenesis of
psoriasis. The Th17 immune pathway is increased in psoriatic patients, both in
peripheral circulation and in skin lesions, and positively correlates with the
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index. Anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
agents, in addition to potent inhibition of TNF-α activity, are able to decrease 
IL-17 levels and Th17 cells in the skin and plasma of patients with
moderate-to-severe psoriasis. We found a decrease in the median Th17 cell count
in peripheral blood after 4 months' therapy with anti-TNF-α compared with
baseline values, but the difference did not reach statistical significance,
probably due to the small cohort size. Our data suggest that anti-TNF-α treatment
for psoriasis is able to achieve a substantial Th17 cell count reduction in the
peripheral blood of patients and that this decrease is significantly associated
with an adequate response to biologic therapy, as previous studies in rheumatoid 
arthritis have shown.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25381985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Dec;227(12):3796-802. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24089.

Reactivation of human polyomavirus JC in patients affected by psoriasis vulgaris 
and psoriatic arthritis and treated with biological drugs: preliminary results.

Nardis C(1), Anzivino E, Bellizzi A, Rodio DM, De Pità O, Chiarini F, Pietropaolo
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University,
Rome, Italy.

Psoriasis vulgaris (PsV) and psoriatic arthritis (PSA) are inter-related
heritable inflammatory skin diseases. Psoriatic lesions develop as a result of
abnormal immune responses, hyperproliferation and altered differentiation of
keratinocytes, and a notable subset of psoriatic patients develops PsA,
characterized by joints inflammation. Recently, biological drugs were introduced 
to treat these diseases. However, this therapy has already been associated with
the development of serious life-threatening infections, such as the reactivation 
of human polyomavirus JC (JCV), responsible for the progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML), a lethal demyelinating disease caused by
oligodendrocytes lytic infection. Therefore, the aims of our study were the
investigation of the possible JCV reactivation in PsV and PsA patients treated
with adalimumab, etanercept, and methotrexate, performing quantitative real-time 
PCR in sera and skin biopsies at the time of recruitment (T0) and after 3 (T3)
and 6 (T6) months of treatment, and the sequencing analysis of the JCV non-coding
control region (NCCR). We found JCV DNA in 5/15 PsV patients and in 2/15 PsA
patients and JCV NCCR sequence analysis always showed a structure similar to
non-pathogenic CY archetype, with random occurrence of a few irrelevant point
mutations. Nevertheless the poor number of patients analyzed, our preliminary
data can pave the way for taking into account that the follow-up of JCV DNA
detection and the JCV NCCR sequence analysis in psoriatic patients may be
important to evaluate the risk of PML onset, considering that patients affected
by autoimmune diseases and treated with biologics continue to rise.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22422468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Jan;172(1):230-8. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13139. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Pattern of response in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis treated with
etanercept.

Griffiths CE(1), Sterry W, Brock F, Dilleen M, Stefanidis D, Germain JM, Mallbris
L.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, M6 8HD, U.K.

BACKGROUND: Etanercept (ETN) 50 mg once weekly (QW) or 50 mg twice weekly (BIW)
for 12 weeks, followed by 50 mg QW in all subjects to Week 24 improved psoriasis 
in patients with concomitant psoriatic arthritis in the PRESTA trial.
OBJECTIVES: To use data from PRESTA to evaluate the effect of ETN in the
treatment of psoriasis by Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) body-region and
component, and determine if PASI responses correlate with the Dermatology Life
Quality Index (DLQI).
METHODS: Median time to 75% improvement in PASI (PASI75), body- and
component-specific subscales over 24 weeks were estimated. Pearson correlation
coefficients determined the association between DLQI score and PASI total score, 
body- and component-specific subscales with ETN treatment at baseline and up to
Week 24.
RESULTS: In total, 748 patients from PRESTA were included (ETN 50 mg QW/QW,
n = 371; BIW/QW, n = 377). Patients achieved PASI75 total score and 75%
improvements in all body regions and components faster on ETN 50 mg BIW/QW than
QW/QW (all P < 0·05). Median time to 75% improvement was faster for the head and 
trunk followed by upper and lower extremities, and for induration and
desquamation followed by erythema and total area. Weak to moderately positive
correlations between improvements in DLQI and PASI total score (r = 0·223-0·463),
all PASI body-specific (r = 0·114-0·432) and component-specific (r = 0·178-0·478)
subscales were observed over 24 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Etanercept treatment-response appears to occur in a body- and
component-specific manner. Changes in quality of life are not captured by PASI or
its subscales.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24861696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Nov;26(11):1436-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04308.x. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Self-reported health outcomes in patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis 
randomized to two etanercept regimens.

Gniadecki R(1), Robertson D, Molta CT, Freundlich B, Pedersen R, Li W, Boggs R,
Zbrozek AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Bispebjerg Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. r.gniadecki@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Moderate/severe psoriasis combined with psoriatic arthritis (PsA)
impairs health-related quality of life (QoL). Etanercept, a fully human tumour
necrosis factor-α receptor fusion protein, is approved for treatment of both
diseases.
OBJECTIVE: To compare patient-reported health outcomes (PROs) of two etanercept
regimens in patients with moderate/severe psoriasis and PsA.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, multicenter study, participants
received etanercept 50 mg twice weekly (BIW; n = 379) or 50 mg weekly (QW; n =
373) for 12 weeks and open-label etanercept 50 mg QW for 12 additional weeks.
PROs included: the EuroQOL-5D (EQ-5D), which measures general health status and
consists of the utility index measuring five dimensions of health, and a visual
analogue scale (VAS) allowing patients to assess health status; the Dermatology
Life Quality Index (DLQI), which measures the impact of skin disease on QoL; the 
Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI), an assessment of
physical function; the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), which
screens for anxiety and depression symptoms; and individual questions on general 
health, disease activity, fatigue, itching, joint pain and morning stiffness.
RESULTS: At baseline, patients reported QoL worse than that seen in many chronic 
medical conditions. Significant within-group improvements in each PRO occurred
from baseline to Week 12 (P < 0.001) in both groups and were maintained at Week
24; DLQI, EQ-5D, HAQ-DI and self assessments improved significantly (P < 0.001)
from baseline as early as Week 3. At Week 12, but not Week 24, improvement in
DLQI, itching and psoriasis activity was greater in the BIW arm (P ≤ 0.004).
Improvements in other PROs were always similar between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Greater improvements in PROs specific to skin disorders were seen
with etanercept BIW than QW at Week 12, but not at Week 24. Both etanercept
regimens led to sustained PRO improvements, starting as early as Week 3.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology © 2011 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 22035157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Dec;28(12):1701-6. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12372.
Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Changes in C-reactive protein in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis
switched to adalimumab therapy after suboptimal response to etanercept,
methotrexate or phototherapy.

Strober BE(1), Poulin Y, Teller C, Wang Y, Williams DA, Goldblum OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT, USA; Probity Medical Research Inc, Waterloo, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis treatment can lower levels of the inflammatory biomarker
C-reactive protein (CRP).
OBJECTIVE: Evaluate CRP changes in patients with chronic plaque psoriasis who
switched to adalimumab following suboptimal response to previous therapies.
METHODS: C-reactive protein was measured at screening and after 16 weeks of
adalimumab treatment following discontinuation of previous therapies: etanercept 
(substudy E; n = 77), methotrexate (substudy M; n = 38) or narrow-band
ultraviolet B phototherapy (substudy P; n = 27). Associations of CRP with
baseline characteristics and efficacy measures were evaluated.
RESULTS: Median CRP change at the final visit was -0.3 mg/L overall and -0.4,
-0.3 and -0.3 mg/L in substudies E, M and P respectively. Clinical response
[Physician Global Assessment (PGA) 'clear' or 'minimal'] was associated with
greater CRP reductions vs. no response (PGA 'mild' or worse) overall (-0.4 vs.
-0.3 mg/L) and in substudies E (-0.4 vs. -0.1 mg/L) and M (-0.5 vs. -0.2 mg/L),
but not P (-0.1 vs. -0.4 mg/L). CRP decreases were, respectively, -0.4 and -0.3
mg/L in patients with and without a history of psoriatic arthritis and -0.1, -0.3
and -0.6 mg/L in normal weight, overweight and obese patients, respectively. CRP 
decreases after 16 weeks correlated positively (β = 0.004) with percentage change
in Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI; P = 0.0398) and negatively (β =
-0.360) with baseline CRP (P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: C-reactive protein levels decreased during adalimumab therapy in
patients with psoriasis who experienced suboptimal response to previous
therapies. Clinical response was associated with greater CRP reductions overall
and in substudies E and M, but not P. CRP reductions correlated with percentage
reductions in PASI.

© 2014 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 24422992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Jul;71(7):1143-50. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200387. Epub
2012 Jan 17.

Comparison of health-related quality of life in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic
arthritis and psoriasis and effects of etanercept treatment.

Strand V(1), Sharp V, Koenig AS, Park G, Shi Y, Wang B, Zack DJ, Fiorentino D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology/Rheumatology, Stanford University, 306 Ramona Road,
Portola Valley, CA 94028, USA. vstrand@stanford.edu

OBJECTIVES: To compare health-related quality of life (HRQoL) before and after
treatment with etanercept in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and psoriasis using spydergram
representations.
METHODS: Data from randomised, controlled trials of etanercept in patients with
RA, PsA and psoriasis were analysed. HRQoL was assessed by the medical outcomes
survey short form 36 (SF-36) physical (PCS) and mental (MCS) component summary
and domain scores. Baseline comparisons with age and gender-matched norms and
treatment-associated changes in domain scores were quantified using spydergrams
and the health utility SF-6D measure.
RESULTS: Mean baseline PCS scores were lower than age and gender-matched norms in
patients with RA and PsA, but near normative values in patients with psoriasis;
MCS scores at baseline were near normal in PsA and psoriasis but low in RA.
Treatment with etanercept resulted in improvements in PCS and MCS scores as well 
as individual SF-36 domains across all indications. Mean baseline SF-6D scores
were higher in psoriasis than in RA or PsA; clinically meaningful improvements in
SF-6D were observed in all three patient populations following treatment with
etanercept.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with RA, PsA and psoriasis demonstrated unique HRQoL
profiles at baseline. Treatment with etanercept was associated with improvements 
in PCS and MCS scores as well as individual domain scores in patients with RA,
PsA and psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC3375587
PMID: 22258482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Nov;51(11):2058-63. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kes187.
Epub 2012 Aug 9.

The early psoriatic arthritis screening questionnaire: a simple and fast method
for the identification of arthritis in patients with psoriasis.

Tinazzi I(1), Adami S, Zanolin EM, Caimmi C, Confente S, Girolomoni G, Gisondi P,
Biasi D, McGonagle D.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Rheumatology, University of Verona, P. le Scuro, 1 37134 Verona,
Italy. ilariatinazzi@yahoo.it

OBJECTIVE: Dermatologists usually see patients with psoriasis before arthritis
develops, making them well placed to diagnose early PsA (ePsA). This study aimed 
to develop a rapid and robust screening questionnaire for predicting PsA in
patients with psoriasis referred to a specialized joint dermatology-rheumatology 
combined clinic.
METHODS: In all, 228 psoriasis patients naïve to DMARD treatment were
administered two screening questionnaire: the new Early ARthritis for Psoriatic
patients (EARP) questionnaire and the existing Psoriatic Arthritis Screening and 
Evaluation (PASE) questionnaire. The diagnostic accuracy of the two
questionnaires for the diagnosis of ePsA was compared by receiving operating
characteristics curves.
RESULTS: After psychometric analysis, a simplified questionnaire of 10 items was 
found to have good internal reliability (Cronbach's α = 0.83) and was much faster
and simpler to administer than the PASE. Both the EARP and PASE questionnaires
presented similar receiving operating characteristics curves (specificity 91.6
and 67.2 and sensitivity 85.2 and 90.7, respectively) in identifying ePsA
patients by using the cut-off value of 3 for EARP-10 and the standard cut-off
value of 44 for PASE. The CASPAR criteria for PsA were present in 61 (26.7%) of
the patients at clinical presentation and in 32.9% at 1-year follow-up, and the
EARP score of ≥3 correlated with clinically determined arthropathy by a
rheumatologist.
CONCLUSION: The EARP questionnaire is simple and fast to administer and proved
robust for the identification of PsA in the dermatological setting.
Dermatologists should consider the EARP for patients attending clinics, as it
correlates well with early PsA diagnosis.

PMID: 22879464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Jun;28(6):790-8. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12177. Epub 
2013 May 17.

Effects of briakinumab treatment for moderate to severe psoriasis on
health-related quality of life and work productivity and activity impairment:
results from a randomized phase III study.

Papp KA(1), Sundaram M, Bao Y, Williams DA, Gu Y, Signorovitch JE, Wang Y, Valdes
JM, Mulani PM.

Author information: 
(1)Probity Medical Research, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is known to have a significant negative impact on a
patient's health-related quality of life, including social, recreational and work
activities.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of briakinumab on quality of life and work
productivity measures in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis.
METHODS: Patients received either briakinumab (n = 981) or placebo (n = 484)
during the 12-week induction phase of trial M06-890. At week 12, patients with a 
Physician's Global Assessment score of 'Clear' or 'Minimal' entered the 40-week
maintenance phase and were to receive briakinumab every 4 weeks, briakinumab
every 12 weeks, or placebo. At weeks 12 and 52, treatment groups were compared
using mean change from baseline in health-related quality of life and Work
Productivity and Activity Impairment Questionnaire scores and the percentage of
patients with minimum clinically important differences.
RESULTS: At week 12, more than half of the briakinumab-treated patients achieved 
improvements meeting or exceeding minimum clinically important differences for
Dermatology Life Quality Index (75.9%), and psoriasis- (64.8%), and psoriatic
arthritis-related (54.1%) pain scores; 48.4% achieved improvements for activity
impairment. Although improvements in quality of life and work productivity
measures were maintained at week 52 for both briakinumab regimens, responder
rates were consistently greater in the every-4-week group than in the
every-12-week group.
CONCLUSION: Briakinumab treatment resulted in clinically significant improvements
in quality of life and work productivity in adults with moderate to severe
psoriasis. Maintenance therapy was associated with a more pronounced benefit for 
the every-4-week briakinumab regimen.

© 2013 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 23679896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Dermatol. 2013 Sep;52(9):1129-34. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12042. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Do patients with mild to moderate psoriasis really have a sedentary lifestyle?

Demirel R(1), Genc A, Ucok K, Kacar SD, Ozuguz P, Toktas M, Sener U, Karabacak H,
Karaca S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Afyon Kocatepe University,
Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.

Comment in
    Int J Dermatol. 2014 Dec;53(12):e592.

The aim of this study was to compare aerobic exercise capacity, daily physical
activity, pulmonary functions, resting metabolic rate, and body composition
parameters in patients with psoriasis and healthy controls. A total of 60
participants (30 [15 men, 15 women] patients with psoriasis, and 30 [15 men, 15
women] healthy controls) ranging in age from 22-57 were included in the study.
Maximal aerobic capacity was determined by Astrand exercise protocol. Daily
physical activity was measured with an accelerometer. Resting metabolic rate was 
determined with an indirect calorimeter. Pulmonary function tests were performed 
with a portable spirometer. Body composition was established with a bioelectric
impedance analysis system. Skinfold thicknesses and body circumference
measurements were carried out. Short Form 36 quality of life questionnaire was
applied to all participants. In both genders, daily physical activity parameters 
were found to be higher in the psoriasis group compared to the control. Maximal
aerobic capacity, resting metabolic rate, pulmonary function tests, body fatness,
body fat distributions, and quality of life were not statistically different
between patients with psoriasis and controls in males and females. We suggest
that patients with psoriasis who do not have psoriatic arthritis or severe
psoriasis are well in performing daily physical activities. In addition, we
suggest that this lifestyle helped to prevent impairments of body fatness, body
fat distributions, resting metabolic rate, pulmonary functions, and quality of
life in patients with mild to moderate psoriasis.

© 2013 The International Society of Dermatology.

PMID: 23879519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1020-6. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-205056. Epub 
2014 Mar 4.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis in a phase 3 randomised, placebo-controlled
trial with apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor.

Kavanaugh A(1), Mease PJ, Gomez-Reino JJ, Adebajo AO, Wollenhaupt J, Gladman DD, 
Lespessailles E, Hall S, Hochfeld M, Hu C, Hough D, Stevens RM, Schett G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of California at San Diego, , La Jolla, California, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor, regulates
inflammatory mediators. Psoriatic Arthritis Long-term Assessment of Clinical
Efficacy 1 (PALACE 1) compared apremilast with placebo in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis despite prior traditional disease-modifying antirheumatic
drug (DMARD) and/or biologic therapy.
METHODS: In the 24-week, placebo-controlled phase of PALACE 1, patients (N=504)
were randomised (1:1:1) to placebo, apremilast 20 mg twice a day (BID) or
apremilast 30 mg BID. At week 16, patients without ≥20% reduction in swollen and 
tender joint counts were required to be re-randomised equally to either
apremilast dose if initially randomised to placebo or remained on their initial
apremilast dose. Patients on background concurrent DMARDs continued stable doses 
(methotrexate, leflunomide and/or sulfasalazine). Primary outcome was the
proportion of patients achieving 20% improvement in modified American College of 
Rheumatology response criteria (ACR20) at week 16.
RESULTS: At week 16, significantly more apremilast 20 mg BID (31%) and 30 mg BID 
(40%) patients achieved ACR20 versus placebo (19%) (p<0.001). Significant
improvements in key secondary measures (physical function, psoriasis) were
evident with both apremilast doses versus placebo. Across outcome measures, the
30-mg group generally had higher and more consistent response rates, although
statistical comparison was not conducted. The most common adverse events were
gastrointestinal and generally occurred early, were self-limiting and
infrequently led to discontinuation. No imbalance in major adverse cardiac
events, serious or opportunistic infections, malignancies or laboratory
abnormalities was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Apremilast was effective in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis,
improving signs and symptoms and physical function. Apremilast demonstrated an
acceptable safety profile and was generally well tolerated.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01172938.

PMCID: PMC4033106
PMID: 24595547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;33(1):11-9. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Early treatment of psoriatic arthritis is associated with improved
patient-reported outcomes: findings from the etanercept PRESTA trial.

Kirkham B(1), de Vlam K(2), Li W(3), Boggs R(4), Mallbris L(5), Nab HW(5),
Tarallo M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (2)Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (3)Quintiles, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(4)Pfizer Inc, Collegeville, PA, USA. (5)Pfizer Europe, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The present paper aims to investigate the effect of psoriatic
arthritis (PsA) disease duration on the outcome of treatment with etanercept
(ETN) in patients with PsA who also have moderate-to-severe psoriasis.
METHODS: Patients from the PRESTA trial who received ≥1 ETN 50 mg once weekly
(QW) dose and had ≥1 post-baseline value were evaluated. Baseline and
after-treatment changes were compared between patients with PsA ≤2 years versus
PsA >2 years in efficacy measures (physician global assessment [PGA] arthritis,
swollen joint count and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index [PASI]) and patient
reported outcomes (PROs; joint pain, arthritis activity, Euro-Qol [EQ-5D] utility
and visual analogue score [VAS]) using linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Baseline efficacy measures were similar between the PsA ≤2 years (n=103)
and PsA >2 years (n=269) groups, with the exception of PGA arthritis (p=0.006).
At week 24, improvements in efficacy measures were observed in both groups but
were significantly greater for PGA arthritis in the PsA ≤2 years group (p=0.03). 
Quality of life (QoL), measured using PROs, was generally lower at baseline in
patients with PsA >2 years. Clinically meaningful improvements were seen in QoL
with ETN treatment in both groups, but the change from baseline scores at week 24
were significantly higher in PsA ≤2 years group for joint pain (p=0.007),
arthritis activity (p=0.01), EQ-5D utility (p=0.046) and EQ-5D VAS (p=0.04)
responses.
CONCLUSIONS: PsA patients responded to ETN 50 mg QW treatment irrespective of
disease duration; however, patients with shorter PsA duration had greater
improvements in arthritis scores and several PRO measures.

PMID: 25535650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013 Feb;12(2):166-74.

Efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in Chinese patients with moderate to severe
plaque-type psoriasis: results from a phase 3 clinical trial (LOTUS).

Zhu X(1), Zheng M, Song M, Shen YK, Chan D, Szapary PO, Wang B; LOTUS
Investigators.

Collaborators: Wang B, Tu C, Hao F, Jin H, Xu J, Gu J, Zheng M, Gao T, Lai W, Liu
X, Gao X, Zhu X, Zhang J, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Available biologic agents for the treatment of psoriasis in China are
limited.
OBJECTIVES: The LOTUS study is a phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
that evaluated the efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in Chinese patients with
moderate to severe plaque-type psoriasis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients (n=322) were randomized to receive ustekinumab 45 
mg or placebo at weeks 0 and 4, with placebo crossover to ustekinumab at week 12;
all patients were followed up to week 36. The primary end point was the
proportion of patients achieving at least a 75% improvement in the Psoriasis Area
and Severity Index (PASI 75) at week 12. Other end points at week 12 included the
proportion of patients with a Physician's Global Assessment (PGA) score of 0 or 1
and the change in Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) score from baseline.
RESULTS: At week 12, 82.5% of ustekinumab-treated patients achieved PASI 75
responses compared with 11.1% of placebo-treated patients (P<.001). Clinical
responses were maintained through week 28, with maximum responses observed at
week 24. Significant improvements in PGA and DLQI were observed at week 12 and
were generally maintained through week 28. At week 12, adverse events rates were 
similar between groups (45 mg: 42.5% vs placebo: 38.5%), and serious adverse
events were reported in 0.6% of patients in each group. Through week 36, no cases
of active tuberculosis, serious infections, malignancies, or major adverse
cardiovascular events were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with results previously reported in global phase 3
studies, ustekinumab was highly effective and generally well tolerated in Chinese
patients with moderate to severe psoriasis through 36 weeks.

PMID: 23377389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Oct 6;2(52):52ra72. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001107.

Effects of AIN457, a fully human antibody to interleukin-17A, on psoriasis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and uveitis.

Hueber W(1), Patel DD, Dryja T, Wright AM, Koroleva I, Bruin G, Antoni C, Draelos
Z, Gold MH; Psoriasis Study Group, Durez P, Tak PP, Gomez-Reino JJ; Rheumatoid
Arthritis Study Group, Foster CS, Kim RY, Samson CM, Falk NS, Chu DS, Callanan D,
Nguyen QD; Uveitis Study Group, Rose K, Haider A, Di Padova F.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, 4002 Basel, Switzerland.

Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) is elaborated by the T helper 17 (T(H)17) subset of T(H)
cells and exhibits potent proinflammatory properties in animal models of
autoimmunity, including collagen-induced arthritis, experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, and experimental autoimmune uveitis. To determine whether
IL-17A mediates human inflammatory diseases, we investigated the efficacy and
safety of AIN457, a human antibody to IL-17A, in patients with psoriasis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and chronic noninfectious uveitis. Patients with chronic
plaque-type psoriasis (n = 36), rheumatoid arthritis (n = 52), or chronic
noninfectious uveitis (n = 16) were enrolled in clinical trials to evaluate the
effects of neutralizing IL-17A by AIN457 at doses of 3 to 10 mg/kg, given
intravenously. We evaluated efficacy by measuring the psoriasis area and severity
index (PASI), the American College of Rheumatology 20% response (ACR20) for
rheumatoid arthritis, or the number of responders for uveitis, as defined by
either vision improvement or reduction in ocular inflammation or corticosteroid
dose. AIN457 treatment induced clinically relevant responses of variable
magnitude in patients suffering from each of these diverse immune-mediated
diseases. Variable response rates may be due to heterogeneity in small patient
populations, differential pathogenic roles of IL-17A in these diseases, and the
different involvement or activation of IL-17A-producing cells. The rates of
adverse events, including infections, were similar in the AIN457 and placebo
groups. These results support a role for IL-17A in the pathophysiology of diverse
inflammatory diseases including psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, and
noninfectious uveitis.

PMID: 20926833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011 May;25(5):559-64. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03838.x. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

Combination of skin, joint and quality of life outcomes with etanercept in
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis in the PRESTA trial.

Prinz JC(1), Fitzgerald O, Boggs RI, Foehl J, Robertson D, Pedersen R, Molta CT, 
Freundlich B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ludwig-Maximilan-University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. joerg.prinz@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) affect skin, and/or joints
and quality of life (QoL).
OBJECTIVE: To better assess the success in multiple attributes in subjects with
both active psoriasis and PsA, the objective was to quantify the proportion of
those who achieved substantial improvement in a composite measure of skin
symptoms, joint manifestations, and QoL, on one of two treatment regimens.
METHODS: Subjects (n=752) with psoriasis and PsA (mean age: 46.5 years, 62.9%
male) received etanercept (ETN) 50mg twice weekly (BIW; n = 379) or 50 mg weekly 
(QW; n=373) for 12 weeks, followed by open-label ETN 50mg QW for 12 weeks. Skin
and joint symptoms and QoL were assessed using psoriasis area and severity index 
(PASI), American College of Rheumatology criteria (ACR) and Euro-QoL (EQ-5D),
respectively.
RESULTS:   By week 24, 30.6% and 25.8% of subjects receiving ETN 50 mg BIW/QW and
ETN 50 mg QW/QW, respectively (P = 0.198) achieved the composite measure of
efficacy for skin plus joints plus QoL (PASI 75 + ACR 50 + EQ-5D VAS >82).
CONCLUSION: At 24 weeks, 25.8-30.6% met the triad of rigorous efficacy outcomes. 
Evaluation of treatment efficacy should address the multiple components of this
disease complex; therefore it may be important to consider this composite measure
in future trials.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology © 2010 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 20840349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):990-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204655. Epub
2014 Jan 30.

Efficacy and safety of the anti-IL-12/23 p40 monoclonal antibody, ustekinumab, in
patients with active psoriatic arthritis despite conventional non-biological and 
biological anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy: 6-month and 1-year results of the
phase 3, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised PSUMMIT 2
trial.

Ritchlin C(1), Rahman P, Kavanaugh A, McInnes IB, Puig L, Li S, Wang Y, Shen YK, 
Doyle MK, Mendelsohn AM, Gottlieb AB; PSUMMIT 2 Study Group.

Collaborators: Alten R, Birbara C, Boh E, Braun J, Budd J, Chattapadhyay C,
Chudzik D, Claudepierre P, Cooper R, Drescher E, Dutz J, Edwards C, Elewski B,
El-Kadi H, Erlacher L, Flipo R, Fretzin SA, George E, Gladstein G, Griffin RM Jr,
Grisanti MW, Guenther L, Gulliver W, Hobbs K, Huang E, Ilivanova E, Jeka S,
Khraishi M, Kokhan M, Korman N, Kunynetz R, Leonardi CL, Lessard C, Lindquist U, 
Martin A, Matheson RT, Murphy FT, Nasonov E, Palmer W, Papp K, Rech J,
Rell-Bakalarska M, Rich P, Rosen C, Rudin A, Ruppert-Roth A, Scheinecker C,
Seigel S, Shaikh S, Sheeran T, Shergy WJ, Siegel EL, Sierakowski S, Sofen H,
Szanto S, Tahir H, Telegdy E, Toth D, Walker D, Wilson AG, Witt M, Wollenhaupt J,
Zoschke D, Zubrzycka A.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy, Immunology & Rheumatology Division, University of Rochester Medical
Center, , Rochester, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Assess ustekinumab efficacy (week 24/week 52) and safety (week 16/week
24/week 60) in patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) despite treatment
with conventional and/or biological anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) agents.
METHODS: In this phase 3, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial, 312 adults with 
active PsA were randomised (stratified by site, weight (≤100 kg/>100 kg),
methotrexate use) to ustekinumab 45 mg or 90 mg at week 0, week 4, q12 weeks or
placebo at week 0, week 4, week 16 and crossover to ustekinumab 45 mg at week 24,
week 28 and week 40. At week 16, patients with <5% improvement in tender/swollen 
joint counts entered blinded early escape (placebo→45 mg, 45 mg→90 mg, 90 mg→90
mg). The primary endpoint was ≥20% improvement in American College of
Rheumatology (ACR20) criteria at week 24. Secondary endpoints included week 24
Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI) improvement, ACR50,
ACR70 and ≥75% improvement in Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI75).
Efficacy was assessed in all patients, anti-TNF-naïve (n=132) patients and
anti-TNF-experienced (n=180) patients.
RESULTS: More ustekinumab-treated (43.8% combined) than placebo-treated (20.2%)
patients achieved ACR20 at week 24 (p<0.001). Significant treatment differences
were observed for week 24 HAQ-DI improvement (p<0.001), ACR50 (p≤0.05) and PASI75
(p<0.001); all benefits were sustained through week 52. Among patients previously
treated with ≥1 TNF inhibitor, sustained ustekinumab efficacy was also observed
(week 24 combined vs placebo: ACR20 35.6% vs 14.5%, PASI75 47.1% vs 2.0%, median 
HAQ-DI change -0.13 vs 0.0; week 52 ustekinumab-treated: ACR20 38.9%, PASI75
43.4%, median HAQ-DI change -0.13). No unexpected adverse events were observed
through week 60.
CONCLUSIONS: The interleukin-12/23 inhibitor ustekinumab (45/90 mg q12 weeks)
yielded significant and sustained improvements in PsA signs/symptoms in a diverse
population of patients with active PsA, including anti-TNF-experienced PsA
patients.

PMCID: PMC4033144
PMID: 24482301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Dec;167(6):1374-81. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12000. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Sleep quality and other patient-reported outcomes improve after patients with
psoriasis with suboptimal response to other systemic therapies are switched to
adalimumab: results from PROGRESS, an open-label Phase IIIB trial.

Strober BE(1), Sobell JM, Duffin KC, Bao Y, Guérin A, Yang H, Goldblum O, Okun
MM, Mulani PM.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Associates, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA. brucestrober30@me.com

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is associated with poor health-related quality of life,
including sleep impairment.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the extent of sleep impairment, the effect of adalimumab on 
sleep and other patient-reported outcomes, and correlations between changes in
these outcomes and sleep quality in patients with psoriasis.
METHODS: Patients in the 16-week, open-label, Phase IIIb PROGRESS trial had
chronic plaque psoriasis and suboptimal response to prior therapy (etanercept,
methotrexate or narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy). Adalimumab was
self-injected subcutaneously (80 mg at week 0, then 40 mg every other week from
week 1). The focus for this analysis was the Medical Outcomes Study Sleep Scale. 
Other patient-reported outcomes included the Dermatology Life Quality Index
(DLQI), Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), Physician's Global Assessment, 
a visual analogue scale for psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis (PsA) pain, and the
Work Productivity and Activity Index Questionnaire-Specific Health Problems.
RESULTS: Patients with psoriasis had impaired sleep at baseline. The degree of
sleep impairment was significantly associated with the extent of work
productivity for all sleep measures and, for some sleep measures, was associated 
with DLQI impairment, clinical severity measured by PASI, the presence of PsA,
and depression. Adalimumab treatment significantly improved sleep quality by 15% 
from baseline, as well as DLQI score, pain and work productivity. The improvement
in sleep was partially explained (R(2 ) = 0·16, P < 0·001) by improvements in the
objectively measured psoriasis signs in PASI.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab treatment improved sleep outcomes and other
patient-reported outcomes including health-related quality of life, work
productivity, daily activity and disease-related pain.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22897348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Lancet. 2015 Dec 19;386(10012):2489-98. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00347-5. Epub 
2015 Oct 1.

Effect of tight control of inflammation in early psoriatic arthritis (TICOPA): a 
UK multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled trial.

Coates LC(1), Moverley AR(1), McParland L(2), Brown S(2), Navarro-Coy N(3),
O'Dwyer JL(4), Meads DM(4), Emery P(1), Conaghan PG(1), Helliwell PS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of
Leeds, Leeds, UK; Leeds NIHR Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds, UK.
(2)Clinical Trials Research Unit, Leeds Institute of Clinical Trials Research,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. (3)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and
Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; Clinical Trials
Research Unit, Leeds Institute of Clinical Trials Research, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, UK. (4)Academic Unit of Health Economics, Leeds Institute of Health
Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. (5)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and
Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; Leeds NIHR
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds, UK. Electronic address:
p.helliwell@leeds.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2015 Dec 19;386(10012):2450-2.

BACKGROUND: Early intervention and tight control of inflammation optimise
outcomes in rheumatoid arthritis but these approaches have not yet been studied
in psoriatic arthritis. We aimed to assess the effect of tight control on early
psoriatic arthritis using a treat-to-target approach.
METHODS: For this open-label multicentre randomised controlled trial, adult
patients (aged ≥18 years) with early psoriatic arthritis (<24 months symptom
duration), who had not previously received treatment with any disease-modifying
anti-rheumatic drugs, were enrolled from eight secondary care rheumatology
centres in the UK. Enrolled patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to
receive either tight control (with review every 4 weeks and with escalation of
treatment if minimal disease activity criteria not met) or standard care
(standard therapy according to the treating clinician, with review every 12
weeks) for 48 weeks. Randomisation was done by minimisation incorporating a
random element, to ensure treatment groups were balanced for randomising centre
and pattern of arthritis (oligoarticular vs polyarticular). The randomisation
procedure was done through a central 24-h automated telephone system based at the
Leeds Institute of Clinical Trials Research (Leeds, UK). This was an open-label
study in which patients and clinicians were aware of treatment group assignment. 
Clinical outcomes were recorded by a masked assessor every 12 weeks. The primary 
outcome was the proportion of patients achieving an American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) 20% (ACR20) response at 48 weeks, analysed by intention to
treat with multiple imputation for missing ACR components. Cost-effectiveness was
also assessed. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number
NCT01106079, and the ISCRCTN registry, number ISCRCTN30147736.
FINDINGS: Between May 28, 2008, and March 21, 2012, 206 eligible patients were
enrolled and randomly assigned to receive tight control (n=101) or standard care 
(n=105). In the intention-to-treat patient population, the odds of achieving an
ACR20 response at 48 weeks were higher in the tight control group than in the
standard care group (odds ratio 1·91, 95% CI 1·03-3·55; p=0·0392). Serious
adverse events were reported by 20 (10%) patients (25 events in 14 [14%] patients
in the tight control group and eight events in six [6%] patients in the standard 
care group) during the course of the study. No unexpected serious adverse events 
or deaths occurred.
INTERPRETATION: Tight control of psoriatic arthritis disease activity through a
treat-to-target approach significantly improves joint outcomes for newly
diagnosed patients, with no unexpected serious adverse events reported.
FUNDING: Arthritis Research UK and Pfizer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26433318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Sep;181(3):401-6. doi: 10.1111/cei.12626. Epub 2015 Jun
23.

Anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment increases circulating T helper type 17
cells similarly in different types of inflammatory arthritis.

Hull DN(1,)(2), Williams RO(2), Pathan E(1), Alzabin S(3), Abraham S(1), Taylor
PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK. (2)Kennedy Institute of
Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, UK. (3)Epistem Ltd., Manchester, 
UK. (4)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, University of Oxford, UK.

We investigated changes in circulating T helper type 17 (Th17) cells following
anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), ankylosing
spondylitis (AS) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) patients. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from 25 RA, 15 AS and eight PsA patients
at baseline 4 and 12 weeks after treatment, and Th17 cell frequencies were
analysed using interleukin (IL)-17 enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) and flow
cytometry. A significant increase in IL-17-producing cells was observed by
ELISPOT in RA and AS patients at 12 weeks. Flow cytometry confirmed significant
increases in CD4(+) IL-17(+) cells at 12 weeks in RA and AS and 4 weeks in PsA
patients. Anti-TNF treatment increases circulating Th17 cells in three different 
diseases.

© 2015 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4557375 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25766640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Feb;74(2):464-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203926. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

TNFα regulates cortisol metabolism in vivo in patients with inflammatory
arthritis.

Nanus DE(1), Filer AD(2), Hughes B(3), Fisher BA(2), Taylor PC(4), Stewart PM(3),
Buckley CD(5), McInnes I(6), Cooper MS(7), Raza K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research Group, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK Centre
for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK. (2)Rheumatology Research Group, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, UK. (3)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. (4)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)Rheumatology Research Group, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK Department of Rheumatology, Sandwell and West Birmingham Hospitals
NHS Trust, Birmingham, UK. (6)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. (7)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK Anzac Research Institute,
Concord Repatriation General Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationship between inflammation and glucocorticoid 
metabolism in vivo, in a clinical study of patients with inflammatory arthritis
treated with anti-TNFα therapy.
METHODS: Urine samples were collected from patients with rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) as part of a multicentre study assessing
responses to infliximab and etanercept. Systemic measures of glucocorticoid
metabolism were assessed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry at weeks 0
(baseline), 4 and 12 after anti-TNFα therapy. Clinical data including DAS28 and
C-reactive protein were also collected.
RESULTS: Systemic measures of 11β-HSD1 activity in patients with inflammatory
arthritis decreased significantly following anti-TNFα therapy in patients with RA
and PsA. Additionally, the activity of the glucocorticoid inactivating enzyme
5α-reductase appeared to increase significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates, for the first time, that the increased
11β-HSD1 activity seen in patients with inflammatory arthritis is mediated
through TNFα. Furthermore, the changes in related glucocorticoid metabolising
enzymes suggest that there is a coordinated change in glucocorticoid metabolism
which promotes higher tissue glucocorticoid levels.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24385202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Sep 24;14(5):R200. doi: 10.1186/ar4038.

Expression of IL-20 in synovium and lesional skin of patients with psoriatic
arthritis: differential response to alefacept treatment.

Lebre MC, Jonckheere CL, Kraan MC, van Kuijk AW, Bos JD, de Rie M, Gerlag DM, Tak
PP.

INTRODUCTION: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory joint disease
associated with psoriasis. Alefacept (a lymphocyte function-associated antigen
(LFA)-3 Ig fusion protein that binds to CD2 and functions as an antagonist to
T-cell activation) has been shown to result in improvement in psoriasis but has
limited effectiveness in PsA. Interleukin-20 (IL-20) is a key proinflammatory
cytokine involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The effects of alefacept
treatment on IL-20 expression in the synovium of patients with psoriasis and PsA 
are currently unknown.
METHODS: Eleven patients with active PsA and chronic plaque psoriasis were
treated with alefacept (7.5 mg per week for 12 weeks) in an open-label study.
Skin biopsies were taken before and after 1 and 6 weeks, whereas synovial
biopsies were obtained before and 4 and 12 weeks after treatment. Synovial
biopsies from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (n = 10) were used as
disease controls. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to detect IL-20
expression, and stained synovial tissue sections were evaluated with digital
image analysis. Double staining was performed with IL-20 and CD68 (macrophages), 
and conversely with CD55 (fibroblast-like synoviocytes, FLSs) to determine the
phenotype of IL-20-positive cells in PsA synovium. IL-20 expression in skin
sections (n = 6) was analyzed semiquantitatively.
RESULTS: IL-20 was abundantly expressed in both PsA and RA synovial tissues. In
inflamed PsA synovium, CD68+ macrophages and CD55+ FLSs coexpressed IL-20, and
its expression correlated with the numbers of FLSs. IL-20 expression in lesional 
skin of PsA patients decreased significantly (P = 0.04) 6 weeks after treatment
and correlated positively with the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI).
IL-20 expression in PsA synovium was not affected by alefacept.
CONCLUSIONS: Conceivably, the relatively limited effectiveness of alefacept in
PsA patients (compared with anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy) might be
explained in part by persistent FLS-derived IL-20 expression.

PMCID: PMC3580512
PMID: 23006144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Joint Bone Spine. 2015 Mar;82(2):104-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2014.11.002. Epub
2015 Jan 23.

Effects of mud-bath therapy in psoriatic arthritis patients treated with TNF
inhibitors. Clinical evaluation and assessment of synovial inflammation by
contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS).

Cozzi F(1), Raffeiner B(2), Beltrame V(3), Ciprian L(2), Coran A(3), Botsios
C(2), Perissinotto E(4), Grisan E(5), Ramonda R(2), Oliviero F(2), Stramare R(3),
Punzi L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine - DIMED, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy. Electronic address: franco.cozzi@unipd.it. (2)Rheumatology Unit,
Department of Medicine - DIMED, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Radiology
Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (4)Unit of
Statistics, Epidemiology and Public Health, Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and
Vascular Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (5)Department of
Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Despite the efficacy of TNF inhibitors, most patients with psoriatic 
arthritis maintain a residual synovial inflammation. The main aim of the study
was to evaluate the effects of mud-bath therapy on clinical picture of PsA
patients treated with TNF inhibitors. The secondary outcome was to assess
synovial inflammation in hand joints detected by contrast-enhanced ultrasound.
Other aims were to verify the risk of arthritis flare and to evaluate the effects
of spa treatment on functional ability and on quality of life.
METHODS: Thirty-six patients with psoriatic arthritis, treated in the last 6
months with TNF inhibitors, were enrolled. After 1:1 randomisation, 18 patients
(group A) underwent mud-bath therapy (12 mudpacks and 12 thermal baths),
maintaining treatment with TNF inhibitors; 18 patients (group B) continued
pharmacological therapy alone. CRP, PASI, DAS28, swollen and tender joint count, 
VAS pain, HAQ and SF-36 were evaluated at baseline (T0) and after 45 days (T1).
Synovial inflammation detected by contrast-enhanced ultrasound, analysed by a
software system, was also assessed.
RESULTS: A significant improvement in PASI (P<0.005), DAS28 (P<0.05), swollen
joint count and tender joint count (P<0.001), and HAQ (P<0.001) between T0 and T1
was observed in group A. No patient underwent a flare-up of arthritis. Ultrasound
videos demonstrated a significant appearance delay (P<0.05) and faster washout
(P<0.02) of contrast dye in group A patients with respect to group B.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a decrease of residual synovial inflammation and 
a beneficial clinical effect of spa therapy in psoriatic arthritis patients
treated with TNF inhibitors.

Copyright © 2014 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25623520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 Feb;179(2):300-8. doi: 10.1111/cei.12449.

Distribution of interleukin-10 family cytokines in serum and synovial fluid of
patients with inflammatory arthritis reveals different contribution to systemic
and joint inflammation.

Scrivo R(1), Conigliaro P, Riccieri V, Di Franco M, Alessandri C, Spadaro A,
Perricone R, Valesini G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Reumatologia, Sapienza 
Università di Roma, Roma, Italy.

Evidence exists that interleukin (IL)-10 family cytokines may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We sought to determine whether or not 
these cytokines are involved in psoriatic arthritis (PsA). We conducted a
prospective study on patients with PsA, RA and osteoarthritis (OA); healthy
controls (HC) were also included. We analysed IL-20, IL-24 and IL-19 serum and
synovial fluid (SF) levels and change of serum levels following treatment with
biological agents. IL-20 serum levels were increased in PsA and RA compared with 
OA patients and HC and with matched SF levels. IL-24 serum levels in PsA, RA and 
OA patients were higher than those in HC and also with respect to matched SF in
PsA. IL-19 serum levels were higher in HC and OA compared with PsA and RA
patients; IL-19 SF levels were higher in PsA and RA compared with OA patients,
and in PsA compared with RA patients. PsA and RA patients showed a reduction of
IL-19 serum levels after biological treatment. Therefore, IL-19 seems to be
involved mainly in the joint inflammation, whereas IL-20 and IL-24 appear to
participate mainly in the systemic responses. These findings may further the
comprehension of the contribution of these cytokines to the inflammatory response
involved in chronic arthritis, as well as to the development of novel therapeutic
strategies.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4298407
PMID: 25178435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Jul;59(1):40-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.04.014. Epub
2010 May 4.

Infliximab monotherapy in Japanese patients with moderate-to-severe plaque
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
multicenter trial.

Torii H(1), Nakagawa H; Japanese Infliximab Study investigators.

Collaborators: Iizuka H, Aoyagi S, Okuyama R, Ohtsuki M, Abe M, Takamori K,
Matsuba S, Terui T, Igarashi A, Kawashima M, Amagai M, Takae Y, Eto H, Etoh T,
Ikeda S, Komine M, Saeki H, Hayakawa K, Kitami A, Watanabe H, Takehara K, Shimada
S, Kitajima Y, Takigawa M, Morita A, Yamanaka K, Takahashi K, Tarutani M, Tani M,
Kubota Y, Nakayama J, Ihn H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Social Insurance Central General Hospital, and
Department of Dermatology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 3-22-1
Hyakunincho, Shinjyuku, Tokyo 169-0073, Japan. toriimd@shahochu.jp

BACKGROUND: A clinical trial of infliximab in psoriasis has not yet been
performed in Asian populations, although infliximab has been approved for the
indications of psoriatic arthritis and plaque psoriasis in the US and the EU.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to validate the efficacy and safety of infliximab in
Japanese patients with plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis, including psoriatic
arthritis, were randomized to the induction therapy (Weeks 0, 2 and 6) with
infliximab 5 mg/kg (n=37) or placebo (n=17). For the maintenance therapy,
infliximab was administered every 8 weeks from Week 14 to Week 62 in the
infliximab group, and placebo was switched to infliximab in the placebo group
starting at Week 16. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients
who had achieved at least 75% improvement in the psoriasis area and severity
index (PASI 75 response rate) from baseline at Week 10.
RESULTS: At Week 10, a total of 68.6% of patients receiving infliximab and none
of those receiving placebo, achieved PASI 75 response (p<0.001). A significant
improvement in PASI, PGA, DLQI, and patient's pain assessment was seen from Week 
6 through Week 14 in the infliximab group compared with the placebo group.
Through Week 66, PASI, PGA, DLQI as well as pain relief were better maintained.
CONCLUSION: Infliximab could provide a sustained improvement effect on skin and
joint symptoms, and accordingly contributed to a sustained improvement in the QOL
of patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
Infliximab was generally well tolerated in most patients. These results
corresponded with the results of the trials in the US and the EU.

Copyright (c) 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20547039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jan;73(1):48-55. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203696. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Effect of certolizumab pegol on signs and symptoms in patients with psoriatic
arthritis: 24-week results of a Phase 3 double-blind randomised
placebo-controlled study (RAPID-PsA).

Mease PJ(1), Fleischmann R, Deodhar AA, Wollenhaupt J, Khraishi M, Kielar D,
Woltering F, Stach C, Hoepken B, Arledge T, van der Heijde D.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, , Seattle, Washington,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of certolizumab pegol (CZP) after
24 weeks in RAPID-PsA (NCT01087788), an ongoing Phase 3 trial in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients were randomised 1:1:1 to placebo, 200 mg CZP every 2 weeks
(Q2W) or 400 mg CZP every 4 weeks (Q4W). Patients could have had exposure to one 
previous tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor therapy. Primary endpoints were
American College of Rheumatology 20% (ACR20) response at week 12 and modified
Total Sharp Score change from baseline at week 24. Secondary endpoints included; 
Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC) score, Health Assessment
Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-DI), Psoriasis Area and Severity Index, Leeds
Enthesitis Index, Leeds Dactylitis Index, and Modified Nail Psoriasis Severity
Index.
RESULTS: Of 409 patients randomised, 368 completed 24 weeks of treatment. ACR20
response was significantly greater in CZP 200 mg Q2W and 400 mg Q4W-treated
patients than placebo (58.0% and 51.9% vs 24.3% (p<0.001)) at week 12, with
improvements observed by week 1. There was a statistically significant
improvement in physical function from baseline, measured by HAQ-DI in CZP
patients compared with placebo (-0.50 vs -0.19, p<0.001) and more patients
treated with CZP 200 mg Q2W and CZP 400 mg achieved an improvement in PsARC at
week 24 than placebo (78.3% and 77.0% vs 33.1% (p<0.001)). Sustained improvements
were observed in psoriatic skin involvement, enthesitis, dactylitis and nail
disease. Higher ACR20 response with CZP was independent of prior TNF inhibitor
exposure. No new safety signals were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Rapid improvements in the signs and symptoms of PsA, including
joints, skin, enthesitis, dactylitis and nail disease were observed across both
CZP dosing regimens.

PMCID: PMC3888622
PMID: 23942868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Sep;73(9):1689-94. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204902. Epub
2014 Apr 19.

Clinical efficacy, radiographic and safety findings through 5 years of
subcutaneous golimumab treatment in patients with active psoriatic arthritis:
results from a long-term extension of a randomised, placebo-controlled trial (the
GO-REVEAL study).

Kavanaugh A(1), McInnes IB(2), Mease P(3), Krueger GG(4), Gladman D(5), van der
Heijde D(6), Zhou Y(7), Lu J(7), Leu JH(8), Goldstein N(9), Beutler A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, Immunology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. (2)Institute of Infection, Immunity, and
Inflammation, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. (3)Department of Rheumatology, 
Swedish Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(5)Toronto Western Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (6)Director of
Imaging Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Janssen Research & Development, LLC., Spring
House, Pennsylvania, USA. (8)Biologics Clinical Pharmacology, Janssen Research & 
Development, LLC., Spring House, Pennsylvania, USA. (9)Department of Immunology, 
Janssen Research & Development, LLC., Spring House, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Assess golimumab's long-term efficacy/safety in psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: Adults with active PsA (≥3 swollen and tender joints, active psoriasis) 
were randomly assigned to subcutaneous placebo, golimumab 50 mg, or golimumab
100 mg every 4 weeks (q4wks) through wk20. All patients received golimumab 50 mg 
or 100 mg q4wks from wk24 forward. Methotrexate was allowed and taken by
approximately half the patients. Findings through 5 years are reported herein.
Efficacy assessments included ≥20% improvement in American College of
Rheumatology (ACR20) response, C-reactive-protein-based, 28-joint-count Disease
Activity Score (DAS28-CRP) response, ≥75% improvement in Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index (PASI75) scores, and PsA-modified Sharp/van der Heijde scores
(SHSs).
RESULTS: 126/405 (31%) randomised patients discontinued treatment through wk252. 
Golimumab was effective in maintaining clinical improvement through year-5
(ACR20: 62.8-69.9%, DAS28-CRP: 75.2-84.9% for randomised patients; PASI75:
60.8-72.2% among randomised patients with ≥3% body surface area involvement) and 
inhibiting radiographic progression (mean changes in PsA-modified SHS: 0.1-0.3)
among patients with radiographic data. While concomitant methotrexate did not
affect ACR20/PASI75, it appeared to reduce radiographic progression. No new
safety signals were identified. Antibodies-to-golimumab occurred in 1.8%/10.0% of
patients with/without methotrexate).
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term golimumab safety/efficacy in PsA was demonstrated through 
5 years.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00265096.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4145441
PMID: 24748630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1000-6. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204741. Epub 
2014 Feb 19.

Ustekinumab, an anti-IL-12/23 p40 monoclonal antibody, inhibits radiographic
progression in patients with active psoriatic arthritis: results of an integrated
analysis of radiographic data from the phase 3, multicentre, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled PSUMMIT-1 and PSUMMIT-2 trials.

Kavanaugh A(1), Ritchlin C, Rahman P, Puig L, Gottlieb AB, Li S, Wang Y, Noonan
L, Brodmerkel C, Song M, Mendelsohn AM, McInnes IB; PSUMMIT-1 and 2 Study Groups.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Allergy and Immunology Division, University of California-San
Diego, , La Jolla, California, USA.

Comment in
    Immunotherapy. 2014;6(5):515-8.

OBJECTIVE: Evaluate ustekinumab, an anti-interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23 antibody, 
effects on radiographic progression in psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: We conducted preplanned integrated analyses of combined radiographic
data from PSUMMIT-1 and PSUMMIT-2 phase 3, randomised, controlled trials.
Patients had active PsA despite prior conventional and/or biologic
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (≥5/66 swollen, ≥5/68 tender joints,
C-reactive protein ≥3.0 mg/L, documented plaque psoriasis). Patients (PSUMMIT-1, 
n=615; PSUMMIT-2, n=312) were randomised to ustekinumab 45 mg, 90 mg, or placebo,
at weeks (wk) 0, 4 and every (q) 12 wks. At wk 16, patients with <5% improvement 
in tender/swollen joint counts entered blinded early escape. All other placebo
patients received ustekinumab 45 mg at wk 24 and wk 28, then q 12 wks.
Radiographs of hands/feet at wks 0/24/52 were assessed using PsA-modified van der
Heijde-Sharp (vdH-S) scores; combined PSUMMIT-1 and PSUMMIT-2 changes in total
vdH-S scores from wk 0 to wk 24 comprised the prespecified primary radiographic
analysis. Treatment effects were assessed using analysis of variance on van der
Waerden normal scores (factors=treatment, baseline methotrexate usage, and
study).
RESULTS: Integrated data analysis results indicated that ustekinumab-treated
patients (regardless of dose) demonstrated significantly less radiographic
progression at wk 24 than did placebo recipients (wk 0-24 total vdH-S score mean 
changes: 0.4-combined/individual ustekinumab dose groups, 1.0-placebo; all
p<0.02). From wk 24 to wk 52, inhibition of radiographic progression was
maintained for ustekinumab-treated patients, and progression was substantially
reduced among initial placebo recipients who started ustekinumab at wk 16 or wk
24 (wk 24 - wk 52, total vdH-S score mean change: 0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Ustekinumab 45 and 90 mg treatments significantly inhibited
radiographic progression of joint damage in patients with active PsA.

PMCID: PMC4033146
PMID: 24553909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Nov;72(11):1777-85. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202035.
Epub 2012 Nov 17.

Clinical efficacy, radiographic and safety findings through 2 years of golimumab 
treatment in patients with active psoriatic arthritis: results from a long-term
extension of the randomised, placebo-controlled GO-REVEAL study.

Kavanaugh A(1), McInnes IB, Mease PJ, Krueger GG, Gladman DD, van der Heijde D,
Mudivarthy S, Xu W, Mack M, Xu Z, Beutler A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, Immunology, University of California, , San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To assess long-term golimumab efficacy/safety in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Adult PsA patients (≥3 swollen, ≥3 tender joints, active psoriasis) were
randomly assigned to subcutaneous injections of placebo, golimumab 50 mg or 100
mg every 4 weeks (q4wks) through week 20. All patients received golimumab 50 or
100 mg beginning week 24. Findings through 2 years are reported. Efficacy
evaluations included ≥20% improvement in American College of Rheumatology (ACR20)
response, good/moderate response in Disease Activity Scores incorporating 28
joints and C-reactive protein (DAS28-CRP), ≥75% improvement in Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index (PASI75) and changes in PsA-modified Sharp/van der Heijde scores
(SHS).
RESULTS: Golimumab treatment through 2 years was effective in maintaining
clinical response (response rates: ACR20 63%-70%, DAS28-CRP 77%-86%, PASI75
56%-72%) and inhibiting radiographic progression (mean change in PsA-modified SHS
in golimumab-treated patients: -0.36), with no clear difference between doses. No
new safety signals were identified through 2 years. With the study's tuberculosis
screening and prophylactic measures, no patient developed active tuberculosis
through 2 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Golimumab 50 and 100 mg for up to 2 years yielded sustained clinical
and radiographic efficacy when administered to patients with active PsA.
Increasing the golimumab dose from 50 to 100 mg q4wks added limited benefit.
Golimumab safety through up to 2 years was consistent with other antitumour
necrosis factor α agents used to treat PsA. Treatment of patients with latent
tuberculosis identified at baseline appeared to be effective in inhibiting the
development of active tuberculosis.

PMCID: PMC3812864
PMID: 23161902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Feb;66(2):e67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.10.020. Epub 
2011 May 25.

The effects of adalimumab treatment and psoriasis severity on self-reported work 
productivity and activity impairment for patients with moderate to severe
psoriasis.

Kimball AB(1), Yu AP, Signorovitch J, Xie J, Tsaneva M, Gupta SR, Bao Y, Mulani
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
harvardskinstudies@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis significantly impairs work productivity and daily
activities.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to examine the effects of adalimumab on psoriasis-related
work productivity and activity impairment and associations between the impairment
and psoriasis severity in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis.
METHODS: Data were from the first 16 weeks of the Randomized controlled
EValuation of adalimumab Every other week dosing in moderate to severe psoriasis 
TriAL (REVEAL). Outcomes as measured by the Work Productivity and Activity
Impairment Questionnaire for Psoriasis (WPAI-Psoriasis) included employment
status, total work productivity impairment, and total activity impairment.
Logistic regression and analyses of covariance were used to assess the effects of
adalimumab and treatment response (≥ 75% improvement in Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index responders) on WPAI-Psoriasis outcomes. Longitudinal generalized
estimating equations and Pearson correlation coefficients were used to assess
associations between WPAI outcomes and psoriasis severity.
RESULTS: Greater improvements in total work productivity impairment and total
activity impairment were observed with adalimumab treatment versus placebo (15.5 
and 11.1 percentage points, respectively; P < .001). Unemployment rate, total
work productivity impairment, and total activity impairment were significantly
associated with greater baseline psoriasis severity. Changes in WPAI outcomes
were significantly correlated with greater psoriasis severity. The Dermatology
Life Quality Index had stronger associations with changes in WPAI outcomes
compared with clinical severity measures (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index and
Physician Global Assessment).
LIMITATIONS: REVEAL only included WPAI data for 16 weeks. Therefore, long-term
impact of adalimumab treatment on productivity outcomes could not be assessed. In
addition, information on occupational job title or industry was not collected and
data were not adjusted for psoriatic arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab reduced psoriasis-related work productivity and activity 
impairment in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis.

Copyright © 2010 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21616560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct;373(14):1329-39. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1412679.

Secukinumab Inhibition of Interleukin-17A in Patients with Psoriatic Arthritis.

Mease PJ(1), McInnes IB, Kirkham B, Kavanaugh A, Rahman P, van der Heijde D,
Landewé R, Nash P, Pricop L, Yuan J, Richards HB, Mpofu S; FUTURE 1 Study Group.

Collaborators: Caeiro F, Soriano E, Baravalle M, Ceitlin R, Rillo O, Carrio J,
Hall S, Nash P, Van den Bosch F, de Vlam K, Geusens P, Pinheiro M, Zerbini C,
Keiserman M, Papp K, Lessard C, Tremblay JL, Rahman P, Mustafa M, Thorne J,
Langevitz P, Reitblat T, Rosner I, Elkayam O, Frediani B, Foti R, Cantini F,
Adami S, Navarra S, Perez E, Lanzon A, Baes R, Lucero A Jr, Gulay-Carvajal C,
Li-Yu J, Tan P, Javier J, Chirieac R, Ionescu RM, Rednic S, Nasonov E, Stanislav 
M, Raskina T, Ershova O, Izmozherova N, Lesnyak O, Zotkin E, Yoon KH, Lim A,
Leung YY, Asavatanabodee P, Suwannalai P, Nanagara R, Louthrenoo W, Strapkova M, 
Tahir H, Mc Innes I, Sheeran T, Helliwell P, Kirkham B, Shimbova K, Stoilov R,
Mihaylova M, Dokoupilova E, Vitek P, Galatikova D, Janecka I, Supronik J, Sieper 
J, Kurthen R, Dahmen G, Demary W, Nuesslein H, Degtyareva E, Maus O, Kekow J,
Rubbert-Roth A, Rech J, Schuch F, Wassenberg S, Martz R, Spieler W, Braun J,
Halpert E, Moreta E, Box J, Legerton C 3rd, Flint K, Starr J, Jajoo R, Caldron P,
Tesser J, Frankel E, El-Kadi H, Petrone D, Reimold A, Singhal A, Sunkureddi P,
Wellborne F, Budd J, Codding C, Kohen M, Kivitz A, Chindalore V, Mease P, Aelion 
J, Lee E, Valente R, Gottlieb A.

BACKGROUND: In a phase 2 study, the inhibition of the interleukin-17A receptor
improved signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis. We sought to evaluate the
efficacy and safety of secukinumab, an anti-interleukin-17A monoclonal antibody, 
in such patients.
METHODS: In this double-blind, phase 3 study, 606 patients with psoriatic
arthritis were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive intravenous
secukinumab (at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram) at weeks 0, 2, and 4, followed by
subcutaneous secukinumab at a dose of either 150 mg or 75 mg every 4 weeks, or
placebo. Patients in the placebo group were switched to subcutaneous secukinumab 
at a dose of 150 mg or 75 mg at week 16 or 24, depending on clinical response.
The primary end point was the proportion of patients with an American College of 
Rheumatology 20 (ACR20) response at week 24, defined as a 20% improvement from
baseline in the number of tender and swollen joints and at least three other
important domains.
RESULTS: ACR20 response rates at week 24 were significantly higher in the group
receiving secukinumab at doses of 150 mg (50.0%) and 75 mg (50.5%) than in those 
receiving placebo (17.3%) (P<0.001 for both comparisons with placebo). Secondary 
end points, including the ACR50 response and joint structural damage, were
significantly better in the secukinumab groups than in the placebo group.
Improvements were sustained through 52 weeks. Infections, including candida, were
more common in the secukinumab groups. Throughout the study (mean secukinumab
exposure, 438.5 days; mean placebo exposure, 128.5 days), four patients in the
secukinumab groups had a stroke (0.6 per 100 patient-years; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.2 to 1.5), and two had a myocardial infarction (0.3 per 100
patient-years; 95% CI, 0.0 to 1.0), as compared with no patients in the placebo
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Secukinumab was more effective than placebo in patients with
psoriatic arthritis, which validates interleukin-17A as a therapeutic target.
Infections were more common in the secukinumab groups than in the placebo group. 
The study was neither large enough nor long enough to evaluate uncommon serious
adverse events or the risks associated with long-term use. (Funded by Novartis
Pharma; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01392326.).

PMID: 26422723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Jul;67(7):1718-28. doi: 10.1002/art.39114.

Rosuvastatin-Induced Carotid Plaque Regression in Patients With Inflammatory
Joint Diseases: The Rosuvastatin in Rheumatoid Arthritis, Ankylosing Spondylitis 
and Other Inflammatory Joint Diseases Study.

Rollefstad S(1), Ikdahl E(1), Hisdal J(2), Olsen IC(1), Holme I(3), Hammer HB(1),
Smerud KT(4), Kitas GD(5), Pedersen TR(6), Kvien TK(1), Semb AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (2)Oslo University Hospital, Aker, Oslo,
Norway. (3)Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Oslo, Norway. (4)Smerud Medical
Research International AS, Oslo, Norway. (5)The Dudley Group NHS Foundation
Trust, West Midlands, UK. (6)Centre of Preventive Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Ullevål, and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and carotid artery plaques
have an increased risk of acute coronary syndromes. Statin treatment with the
goal of achieving a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level of ≤1.8
mmoles/liter (≤70 mg/dl) is recommended for individuals in the general population
who have carotid plaques. The aim of the ROsuvastatin in Rheumatoid Arthritis,
Ankylosing Spondylitis and other inflammatory joint diseases (RORA-AS) study was 
to evaluate the effect of 18 months of intensive lipid-lowering treatment with
rosuvastatin with regard to change in carotid plaque height.
METHODS: Eighty-six patients (60.5% of whom were female) with carotid plaques and
inflammatory joint disease (55 with RA, 21 with AS, and 10 with psoriatic
arthritis) were treated with rosuvastatin to obtain the LDL cholesterol goal.
Carotid plaque height was evaluated by B-mode ultrasonography.
RESULTS: The mean ± SD age of the patients was 60.8 ± 8.5 years, and the median
compliance with rosuvastatin treatment was 97.9% (interquartile range [IQR]
96.0-99.4). At baseline, the median number and height of the carotid plaques were
1.0 (range 1-8) and 1.80 mm (IQR 1.60-2.10), respectively. The mean ± SD change
in carotid plaque height after 18 months of treatment with rosuvastatin was
-0.19 ± 0.35 mm (P < 0.0001). The mean ± SD baseline LDL cholesterol level was
4.0 ± 0.9 mmoles/liter (154.7 ± 34.8 mg/dl), and the mean reduction in the LDL
cholesterol level was -2.3 mmoles/liter (95% confidence interval [95% CI] -2.48, 
-2.15) (-88.9 mg/dl [95% CI -95.9, -83.1]). The mean ± SD LDL cholesterol level
during the 18 months of rosuvastatin treatment was 1.7 ± 0.4 mmoles/liter (area
under the curve). After adjustment for age/sex/blood pressure, no linear
relationship between a reduction in carotid plaque height and the level of LDL
cholesterol exposure during the study period was observed. Attainment of the LDL 
cholesterol goal of ≤1.8 mmoles/liter (≤70 mg/dl) or the amount of change in the 
LDL cholesterol level during the study period did not influence the degree of
carotid plaque height reduction.
CONCLUSION: Intensive lipid-lowering treatment with rosuvastatin induced
atherosclerotic regression and reduced the LDL cholesterol level significantly in
patients with inflammatory joint disease.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 25778850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Lancet. 2015 Sep 19;386(9999):1137-46. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61134-5. Epub
2015 Jun 28.

Secukinumab, a human anti-interleukin-17A monoclonal antibody, in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (FUTURE 2): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial.

McInnes IB(1), Mease PJ(2), Kirkham B(3), Kavanaugh A(4), Ritchlin CT(5), Rahman 
P(6), van der Heijde D(7), Landewé R(8), Conaghan PG(9), Gottlieb AB(10),
Richards H(11), Pricop L(12), Ligozio G(12), Patekar M(13), Mpofu S(11); FUTURE 2
Study Group.

Collaborators: Bird P, Hall S, Nash P, Zochling J, de Vlam K, Langenaken C,
Geusens P, Beaulieu A, Tremblay JL, McCarthy T, Papp K, Poulin Y, Cohen M,
Galatikova D, Dokoupilova E, Dvorak Z, Mann H, Sieper J, Spieler W, Kurthen R,
Braun J, Wollenhaupt J, Tony HP, Schuch F, Schulze-Koops H, Rech J, Leszczynski
P, Adamski Z, Szepietowski J, Tlustochowicz W, Kaszuba A, Szymanska M, Stanislav 
M, Nesmeyanova O, Vezikova N, Ershova O, Izmozherova N, Zotkin E, Petrova M,
Kastanayan A, Yakupova S, Agafina A, Asavatanabodee P, Suwannalai P, Kerrane J,
Tahir H, Kirkham B, McInnes I, Edwards C, Chinoy H, Marzo-Ortega H, Kaul A,
Sheeran T, Clunie G, Schechtman J, Gaylis N, Kaine J, Lawson J, El-Kadi H, Flint 
K, Kivitz A, Churchhill M, Sikes D, Lowenstein M, Halpert E, Abdulky M, Palmer W,
Codding C, Legerton C 3rd, Singhal A, Sunkureddi P, Gough W, Forman S, Box J,
Khan M, Barranco E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK. Electronic address: Iain.McInnes@glasgow.ac.uk. (2)Swedish Medical
Center and University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)Guy's and St Thomas'
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego,
CA, USA. (5)Allergy/Immunology and Rheumatology Division, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. (6)Memorial University, Newfoundland, NL, Canada. 
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands. (8)Amsterdam Rheumatology and Immunology Center, Amsterdam, and
Atrium Medical Center, Heerlen, Netherlands. (9)NIHR Leeds Musculoskeletal
Biomedical Research Unit and University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. (10)Department of
Dermatology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. (11)Novartis Pharma, Basel,
Switzerland. (12)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(13)Novartis Healthcare, Hyderabad, India.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;11(9):503.
    Lancet. 2015 Sep 19;386(9999):1114-6.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin 17A is a proinflammatory cytokine that is implicated in
the pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis. We assessed the efficacy and safety of
subcutaneous secukinumab, a human anti-interleukin-17A monoclonal antibody, in
patients with psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled study undertaken at 76
centres in Asia, Australia, Canada, Europe, and the USA, adults (aged ≥18 years
old) with active psoriatic arthritis were randomly allocated in a 1:1:1:1 ratio
with computer-generated blocks to receive subcutaneous placebo or secukinumab 300
mg, 150 mg, or 75 mg once a week from baseline and then every 4 weeks from week
4. Patients and investigators were masked to treatment assignment. The primary
endpoint was the proportion of patients achieving at least 20% improvement in the
American College of Rheumatology response criteria (ACR20) at week 24. Analysis
was by intention to treat. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
number NCT01752634.
FINDINGS: Between April 14, and Nov 25, 2013, 397 patients were randomly assigned
to receive secukinumab 300 mg (n=100), 150 mg (n=100), 75 mg (n=99), or placebo
(n=98). A significantly higher proportion of patients achieved an ACR20 at week
24 with secukinumab 300 mg (54 [54%] patients; odds ratio versus placebo 6·81,
95% CI 3·42-13·56; p<0·0001), 150 mg (51 [51%] patients; 6·52, 3·25-13·08;
p<0·0001), and 75 mg (29 [29%] patients; 2·32, 1·14-4·73; p=0·0399) versus
placebo (15 [15%] patients). Up to week 16, the most common adverse events were
upper respiratory tract infections (four [4%], eight [8%], ten [10%], and seven
[7%] with secukinumab 300 mg, 150 mg, 75 mg, and placebo, respectively) and
nasopharyngitis (six [6%], four [4%], six [6%], and eight [8%], respectively).
Serious adverse events were reported by five (5%), one (1%), and four (4%)
patients in the secukinumab 300 mg, 150 mg, and 75 mg groups, respectively,
compared with two (2%) in the placebo group. No deaths were reported.
INTERPRETATION: Subcutaneous secukinumab 300 mg and 150 mg improved the signs and
symptoms of psoriatic arthritis, suggesting that secukinumab is a potential
future treatment option for patients with this disorder.
FUNDING: Novartis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26135703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2013 Oct;65(10):1666-73. doi: 10.1002/acr.22044.

Patient-reported outcomes and the association with clinical response in patients 
with active psoriatic arthritis treated with golimumab: findings through 2 years 
of a phase III, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Kavanaugh A(1), McInnes IB, Krueger GG, Gladman D, Beutler A, Gathany T, Mack M, 
Tandon N, Han C, Mease P.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of golimumab on physical function,
health-related quality of life (HRQOL), and productivity in psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: GO-REVEAL was a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Adult
patients with active PsA (n = 405) received golimumab (50 or 100 mg) or placebo
every 4 weeks, with early escape at week 16 (placebo → 50 mg, 50 → 100 mg) or
placebo crossover to golimumab 50 mg at week 24. Patient-reported outcomes
included physical function (Health Assessment Questionnaire [HAQ] disability
index [DI] score), HRQOL (36-item Short Form health survey [SF-36] mental
component summary [MCS] and physical component summary [PCS] scores), and
productivity (home/school/work). Clinical response was assessed using the
28-joint Disease Activity Score using the C-reactive protein level (DAS28-CRP)
and the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score for arthritis and skin
symptoms, respectively.
RESULTS: At week 24, golimumab-treated patients had significant mean improvements
in HAQ DI (0.36), SF-36 (PCS 7.83, MCS 3.84), and productivity (2.24) scores
compared with placebo (-0.01, 0.67, -0.60, and 0.08, respectively; P < 0.001 for 
all). Also, greater proportions of golimumab- than placebo-treated patients had
clinically meaningful improvements in HAQ DI (≥0.30) and SF-36 PCS and MCS (≥5)
scores at week 24 (P < 0.05). Also at week 24, improvements in DAS28-CRP scores
were significantly but moderately correlated with improvements in HAQ DI, SF-36
PCS, and productivity scores. Correlations between these patient-reported
outcomes and improvements in PASI, enthesitis, and dactylitis scores were very
weak. Improvements in HAQ DI, SF-36, and productivity scores were similar among
all groups by week 52 and week 104 when including placebo → golimumab crossover
patients.
CONCLUSION: Golimumab-treated patients had significant improvements in physical
function, HRQOL, and productivity through week 24; these improvements correlated 
with clinical improvement in signs and symptoms of peripheral arthritis and were 
sustained through 2 years.

© 2013 The Authors. Arthritis Care & Research is published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4282022
PMID: 23666608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Dermatolog Treat. 2014 Feb;25(1):90-5. doi: 10.3109/09546634.2013.800185. Epub 
2013 Jun 20.

Utility of the PASE questionnaire, psoriatic arthritis (PsA) prevalence and PsA
improvement with anti-TNF therapy: results from the PRISTINE trial.

Husni ME(1), Qureshi AA, Koenig AS, Pedersen R, Robertson D.

Author information: 
(1)Cleveland Clinic , Cleveland, OH , USA.

OBJECTIVE: The authors tested the Psoriatic Arthritis Screening and Evaluation
(PASE) to assess usefulness for psoriatic arthritis (PsA) screening before and
after anti-TNF treatment in a clinical trial setting.
METHODS: Participants of the PRISTINE trial (NCT0066305) were randomized to
etanercept 50 mg once weekly or twice weekly. PASE was administered at baseline
and 12 weeks of treatment. Scores were compared by a paired sample t-test.
Logistic regression and receiver operating curves were used to compare disease
assessments against the PASE scores.
RESULTS: Participants (N = 273, once weekly, N = 137; twice weekly, N = 136) had 
a mean age of 44 years; 70% were male; mean PASI was 21. At baseline, 31% had a
self-reported history of physician-diagnosed PsA (mean duration, 8 years); ∼25%
had a PASE total score ≥47, indicating active PsA. At week 12, 14% had scores ≥47
(p =. 0143). PASE scores correlated with subject global assessment of joint pain.
CONCLUSIONS: The PASE was used in a randomized controlled clinical trial in a
moderate to severe psoriasis population with a high prevalence of PsA. The
findings also support the use of PASE as a tool to measure treatment response for
PsA.

PMID: 23688125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:528105. doi: 10.1155/2014/528105. Epub 2014 May 20.

Disease activity in psoriatic arthritis: comparison of the discriminative
capacity and construct validity of six composite indices in a real world.

Salaffi F(1), Ciapetti A(1), Carotti M(2), Gasparini S(1), Gutierrez M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Reumatologica, c/o Ospedale C. Urbani-ASUR Marche Area Vasta 2,
Università Politecnica delle Marche, Via dei Colli, 52 Jesi, 60035 Ancona, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Radiologiche, Università Politecnica delle Marche,
Ancona, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To compare, "in a real world," the performance of the most common
composite activity indices in a cohort of PsA patients.
METHODS: A total of 171 PsA patients were involved. The following variables were 
evaluated: peripheral joint assessment, patient reported of pain, physician and
patient assessments of disease activity, patient general health status,
dactylitis digit count, Leeds Enthesitis Index, Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ), physical and mental component summary score of the Medical Outcome Survey 
(SF-36), Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), Dermatology Life Quality
Index, C-reactive protein (CRP), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). To
measure the disease activity, the Disease Activity Score (DAS28-ESR and
DAS28-CRP), Simple Disease Activity Index (SDAI), Composite Psoriatic Disease
Activity Index (CPDAI), disease activity in psoriatic arthritis (DAPSA), and
Psoriatic Arthritis Disease Activity Score (PASDAS) have been calculated. The
criteria for minimal disease activity (MDA) and remission were applied as
external criterion.
RESULTS: The ROC were similar in all the composite measures. Only the CPDAI
showed less discriminative ability. There was a high degree of correlation
between all the indices (P < 0.0001). The highest correlations were between DAPSA
and SDAI (rho = 0.996) and between DAPSA and DAS28-CRP (rho = 0.957). CPDAI,
DAPSA, and PASDAS had the most stringent definitions of remission and MDA
category. DAS28-ESR and DAS28-CRP had the highest proportions in remission and
MDA.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a good concurrent validity and discriminant capacity of six
disease activity indices were observed, the proportions of patients classified in
the disease activity levels differed. In particular, the rate of patients in
remission was clearly different among the respective indices.

PMCID: PMC4055291
PMID: 24967375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Jul 4;16(4):R140. doi: 10.1186/ar4602.

Discriminant validity, responsiveness and reliability of the arthritis-specific
Work Productivity Survey assessing workplace and household productivity in
patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Osterhaus JT, Purcaru O.

INTRODUCTION: The novel arthritis-specific Work Productivity Survey (WPS) was
developed to estimate patient productivity limitations associated with arthritis 
within and outside the home, which is an unmet need in psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
The WPS has been validated in rheumatoid arthritis. This report assesses the
discriminant validity, responsiveness and reliability of the WPS in adult-onset
PsA.
METHODS: Psychometric properties were assessed using data from the RAPID-PsA
trial (NCT01087788) investigating certolizumab pegol (CZP) efficacy and safety in
PsA. WPS was completed at baseline and every 4 weeks until Week 24. Validity was 
evaluated at baseline via known-groups defined using first and third quartiles of
patients' Disease Activity Score 28 based on C-reactive protein (DAS28(CRP)),
Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI), Short Form-36 (SF-36) 
items and PsA Quality of Life (PsAQoL) scores. Responsiveness and reliability
were assessed by comparing WPS mean changes at Week 12 in American College of
Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) or HAQ-DI Minimal Clinically
Important Difference (MCID) 0.3 responders versus non-responders, as well as
using standardized response means (SRM). All comparisons were conducted on the
observed cases in the Randomized Set, regardless of the randomization group,
using a non-parametric bootstrap-t method.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with a better health state, patients with a worse
health state had on average 2 to 6 times more household work days lost, more days
with reduced household productivity, more days missed of family/social/leisure
activities, more days with outside help hired and a significantly higher
interference of arthritis per month. Among employed patients, those with a worse 
health state had 2 to 4 times more workplace days lost, more days with patient
workplace productivity reduced, and a significantly higher interference of
arthritis on patient workplace productivity versus patients with a better health 
state. WPS was also responsive to clinical changes, with responders having
significantly larger improvements at Week 12 in WPS scores versus non-responders.
The effect sizes for changes in productivity in ACR20 or HAQ-DI MCID responders
were moderate (0.5 < SRM < 0.8) or small.
CONCLUSIONS: These analyses demonstrate the validity, responsiveness and
reliability of the WPS, as an instrument for the measurement of patient
productivity within and outside the home in an adult-onset PsA population.

PMCID: PMC4226958
PMID: 24996416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMJ. 2010 Feb 2;340:c147. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c147.

Comparison of two etanercept regimens for treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis: PRESTA randomised double blind multicentre trial.

Sterry W(1), Ortonne JP, Kirkham B, Brocq O, Robertson D, Pedersen RD, Estojak J,
Molta CT, Freundlich B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité University Medicine 10117,
Berlin, Germany. wolfram.sterry@charite.de

Comment in
    BMJ. 2010;340:c229.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the efficacy over 12 weeks of two different etanercept
regimens in treating the skin manifestations of psoriasis in patients who also
have psoriatic arthritis and to evaluate efficacy and safety over an additional
12 weeks of open label etanercept treatment. Design Randomised double blind
multicentre outpatient study.
SETTING: 98 outpatient facilities in Europe, Latin America, and the Asia Pacific 
region. Participants 752 patients with both psoriasis (evaluated by
dermatologists) and psoriatic arthritis (evaluated by rheumatologists).
INTERVENTIONS: During the blinded portion of the study, participants were
randomised to receive etanercept 50 mg twice weekly (n=379) or 50 mg once weekly 
(n=373) for 12 weeks by subcutaneous injection. All participants then received
open label etanercept 50 mg once weekly for 12 additional weeks, while remaining 
blinded to the regimen.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary efficacy end point was the proportion of
participants achieving "clear" or "almost clear" on the physician's global
assessment of psoriasis at week 12. Secondary efficacy analyses included
psoriasis area and severity index, American College of Rheumatology responses,
psoriatic arthritis response criteria, and improvement in joint and tendon
disease manifestations.
RESULTS: At week 12, 46% (176/379) of participants receiving etanercept 50 mg
twice weekly achieved a physician's global assessment of psoriasis of "clear" or 
"almost clear" compared with 32% (119/373) in the group treated with 50 mg once
weekly (P<0.001). In contrast, an equally high percentage of participants in both
groups achieved psoriatic arthritis response criteria (77% (284/371) in the twice
weekly/once weekly group versus 76% (282/371) in the once weekly/once weekly
group). Participants treated with 50 mg twice weekly/once weekly had greater mean
reductions from baseline in the psoriasis area and severity index at week 12
compared with those who received 50 mg once weekly/once weekly (71% v 62%,
P<0.001), with less difference at week 24 (78% v 74%, P<0.110). Joint and tendon 
disease manifestations improved from baseline in both groups to a similar extent.
No new safety signals were seen in either etanercept treatment group, and no
significant difference in the safety profiles was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In participants with active psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis,
initial treatment of the psoriasis with etanercept 50 mg twice weekly may allow
for more rapid clearance of skin lesions than with 50 mg once weekly. A regimen
of 50 mg once weekly seems to be appropriate for treatment of joint and tendon
rheumatic symptoms. The choice of regimen should be determined by the clinical
needs of the individual patient.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinical trials NCT00245960.

PMID: 20124563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Lancet. 2013 Aug 31;382(9894):780-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60594-2. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in patients with active psoriatic arthritis: 1
year results of the phase 3, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled
PSUMMIT 1 trial.

McInnes IB(1), Kavanaugh A, Gottlieb AB, Puig L, Rahman P, Ritchlin C, Brodmerkel
C, Li S, Wang Y, Mendelsohn AM, Doyle MK; PSUMMIT 1 Study Group.

Collaborators: Aelion J, Akovbyan G, Andersone D, Bakulev A, Basijokiene V,
Beaulieu A, Birbara C, Boh E, Bourcier M, Braun J, Brzezicki J, Buchanan R, Budd 
J, Bukauskiene L, Burnette M, Crespillo JC, Carey W, Chattapadhyay C, Chudzik D, 
Cooper R, Drescher E, Dudek A, Dutz J, El-Kadi H, Erlacher L, Fretzin SA, Meijide
JA, George E, Gilchrist N, Gladstein G, Gow P, Graninger W, Griffin RM Jr,
Guenther L, Gulliver W, Hall S, Halter DG, Hobbs K, Ilivanova E, Järvinen P, Jeka
S, Jones P, Khraishi M, Kokhan M, Kovacs A, Kovacs L, Kubanov A, Kunynetz R,
Langley R, Lee S, Leonardi CL, Lessard C, Lietuvininkiene V, Lizzul P, Martin A, 
Maslyanskiy A, Matheson RT, Mikazane H, Murphy FT, Nash P, Nasonov E, Sarabia FN,
Orlov-Morozov A, Paimela L, Palmer W, Papp K, Pileckyte M, Poor G, Poulin Y,
Silva RQ, Rapoport R, Rebrov A, Rell-Bakalarska M, Rich P, Rischmueller M,
Rojkovich B, Rosen C, Rosoph L, Scheinecker C, Schopf R, Sebastian M, Seigel S,
Shaikh S, Sheeran T, Shergy WJ, Shirinsky V, Siegel EL, Sofen H, Sterry W,
Supronik J, Szabo Z, Szanyó F, Tahir H, Tan J, Taylor W, Temnikov V, Thaci D,
Toth D, Újfalussy I, Valleala H, Vender R, Wasel N, Willans M, Wollenhaupt J,
Zamani O, Zanetakis E, Zonova E, Zoschke D, Zubrzycka-Sienkiewicz A.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2013 Aug 31;382(9894):748-9.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2013 Aug;9(8):445.

BACKGROUND: Many patients with psoriasis develop psoriatic arthritis, a chronic
inflammatory disease that afflicts peripheral synovial, axial, and entheseal
structures. The fully human monoclonal antibody ustekinumab is an efficacious
treatment for moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis. We did a randomised,
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial to assess the safety and efficacy of
ustekinumab in patients with active psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: In this phase 3, multicentre, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial at 
104 sites in Europe, North America, and Asia-Pacific, adults with active
psoriatic arthritis (≥5 tender and ≥5 swollen joints, C-reactive protein ≥3·0
mg/L) were randomly assigned (1:1:1, by dynamic central randomisation based on an
algorithm implemented by an interactive voice-web response system) to 45 mg
ustekinumab, 90 mg ustekinumab, or placebo at week 0, week 4, and every 12 weeks 
thereafter. At week 16, patients with less than 5% improvement in both tender and
swollen joint counts entered masked early-escape and were given 45 mg ustekinumab
(if in the placebo group) or 90 mg ustekinumab (if in the 45 mg group). At week
24, all remaining patients in the placebo group received ustekinumab 45 mg, which
they continued at week 28 and every 12 weeks thereafter. Our primary endpoint was
20% or greater improvement in American College of Rheumatology (ACR20) criteria
at week 24. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01009086) and
EudraCT (2009-012264-14).
FINDINGS: Between Nov 30, 2009, and March 30, 2011, 615 patients were randomly
assigned-206 to placebo, 205 to 45 mg ustekinumab, and 204 to 90 mg ustekinumab. 
More ustekinumab-treated (87 of 205 [42·4%] in the 45 mg group and 101 of 204
[49·5%] in the 90 mg group) than placebo-treated (47 of 206 [22·8%]) patients
achieved ACR20 at week 24 (p<0·0001 for both comparisons); responses were
maintained at week 52. At week 16, proportions of patients with adverse events
were similar in the ustekinumab and placebo groups (171 of 409 [41·8%] vs 86 of
205 [42·0%]).
INTERPRETATION: Ustekinumab significantly improved active psoriatic arthritis
compared with placebo, and might offer an alternative therapeutic mechanism of
action to approved biological treatments.
FUNDING: Janssen Research & Development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23769296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1114-22. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-203046. Epub
2013 May 21.

Efficacy and safety of open-label etanercept on extended oligoarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, enthesitis-related arthritis and psoriatic arthritis: part 
1 (week 12) of the CLIPPER study.

Horneff G(1), Burgos-Vargas R, Constantin T, Foeldvari I, Vojinovic J, Chasnyk
VG, Dehoorne J, Panaviene V, Susic G, Stanevica V, Kobusinska K, Zuber Z, Mouy R,
Rumba-Rozenfelde I, Breda L, Dolezalova P, Job-Deslandre C, Wulffraat N, Alvarez 
D, Zang C, Wajdula J, Woodworth D, Vlahos B, Martini A, Ruperto N; Paediatric
Rheumatology International Trials Organisation (PRINTO).

Collaborators: Akikusa J, Chaitow J, Lauwerys B, Wouters C, Jaller Raad JJ, Otero
Escalante WJ, Velez PJ, Jarosova K, Macku M, Quartier P, Bader-Meunier B,
Huppertz HI, Trauzeddel R, Flato B, Dobrzyniecka B, Sak LR, Nasonov E, Koskova E,
Avcin T, Calvo Penades I, Gamir ML, Lopez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asklepios Clinic, , Sankt Augustin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of etanercept (ETN) in
paediatric subjects with extended oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(eoJIA), enthesitis-related arthritis (ERA), or psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: CLIPPER is an ongoing, Phase 3b, open-label, multicentre study; the
12-week (Part 1) data are reported here. Subjects with eoJIA (2-17 years), ERA
(12-17 years), or PsA (12-17 years) received ETN 0.8 mg/kg once weekly (maximum
50 mg). Primary endpoint was the percentage of subjects achieving JIA American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) 30 criteria at week 12; secondary outcomes included
JIA ACR 50/70/90 and inactive disease.
RESULTS: 122/127 (96.1%) subjects completed the study (mean age 11.7 years). JIA 
ACR 30 (95% CI) was achieved by 88.6% (81.6% to 93.6%) of subjects overall; 89.7%
(78.8% to 96.1%) with eoJIA, 83.3% (67.2% to 93.6%) with ERA and 93.1% (77.2% to 
99.2%) with PsA. For eoJIA, ERA, or PsA categories, the ORs of ETN vs the
historical placebo data were 26.2, 15.1 and 40.7, respectively. Overall JIA ACR
50, 70, 90 and inactive disease were achieved by 81.1, 61.5, 29.8 and 12.1%,
respectively. Treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), infections, and serious
AEs, were reported in 45 (35.4%), 58 (45.7%), and 4 (3.1%), subjects,
respectively. Serious AEs were one case each of abdominal pain, bronchopneumonia,
gastroenteritis and pyelocystitis. One subject reported herpes zoster and another
varicella. No differences in safety were observed across the JIA categories.
CONCLUSIONS: ETN treatment for 12 weeks was effective and well tolerated in
paediatric subjects with eoJIA, ERA and PsA, with no unexpected safety findings.

PMCID: PMC4033142
PMID: 23696632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Mar;26(3):361-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2011.04078.x. Epub 2011 Apr 20.

Treatment of plaque-type psoriasis with oral CF101: data from an exploratory
randomized phase 2 clinical trial.

David M(1), Akerman L, Ziv M, Kadurina M, Gospodinov D, Pavlotsky F, Yankova R,
Kouzeva V, Ramon M, Silverman MH, Fishman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rabin Medical Center, Tel Aviv University,
Petah-Tikva, Israel.

AIMS: CF101 demonstrated a marked anti-inflammatory effect in Phase 2 studies
conducted in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and dry eye syndrome. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of CF101 for the treatment of 
patients with moderate to severe plaque-type psoriasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a phase 2, multicentre, randomized, double-blind,
dose-ranging, placebo-controlled study. Seventy five patients with moderate to
severe plaque-type psoriasis were enrolled, randomized and treated with CF101 (1,
2, or 4 mg) or placebo administered orally twice daily for 12 weeks. Safety and
change from base line of Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score and
physician's global assessment (PGA) score over 12 weeks.
RESULTS: In the 2 mg CF101-treated group, a progressive improvement in the mean
change from baseline in the PASI score vs. placebo throughout the study period
was observed, with a statistically significant difference on weeks 8 and 12 (P = 
0.047; P = 0.031, respectively). In this group, 35.3% of the patients achieved
PASI ≥ 50 response, and 23.5% of the patients achieved a PGA score of 0 or 1.
CF101 was safe and well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: CF101 was well tolerated and demonstrated clear evidence of efficacy
in patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and
Venereology © 2011 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 21504485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Mar;74(3):538-46. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204195. Epub 
2013 Dec 16.

Golimumab 3-year safety update: an analysis of pooled data from the long-term
extensions of randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials conducted in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis or ankylosing
spondylitis.

Kay J(1), Fleischmann R(2), Keystone E(3), Hsia EC(4), Hsu B(4), Mack M(5),
Goldstein N(5), Braun J(6), Kavanaugh A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School and UMass Memorial Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA. 
(2)Department of Rheumatology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Rheumatology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Spring House,
Pennsylvania, USA University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Spring House, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebeit, Herne, Germany.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess pooled golimumab safety up to year 3 of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) trials.
METHODS: Golimumab 50 and 100 mg, administered subcutaneously (SC) every 4 weeks 
(q4wk), were assessed in patients with active RA (methotrexate-naïve,
methotrexate-experienced and anti-TNF (tumour necrosis factor)-experienced), PsA 
or AS, despite conventional therapy. Placebo control continued up to week (wk) 24
(wk 52, methotrexate-naïve), with early escape at wk 16 (wk 28,
methotrexate-naïve); subsequently, all patients received golimumab 50 or 100 mg
q4wk. After the blinded controlled period, golimumab doses could be adjusted per 
investigator discretion. Pooled safety analyses reported herein include data from
placebo-controlled and uncontrolled study periods up to wk 160. Determinations of
incidences/100 patient-years (pt-yrs) for rare events also included RA patients
from a phase IIb trial.
RESULTS: Across five phase III trials of SC golimumab, 639 patients received
placebo and 2226 received golimumab 50 mg (n=1249) and/or 100 mg (n=1501) up to
wk 160 (patients may be included in more than one group because non-responders
were allowed early escape); 1179 patients were treated for ≥156 weeks. For
placebo, golimumab 50 mg and golimumab 100 mg, respective adverse event
incidences/100 pt-yrs (95% CIs) up to wk 160 were: 0.28 (0.01 to 1.56), 0.30
(0.12 to 0.62), 0.41 (0.23 to 0.69) for death; 5.31 (3.20 to 8.30), 3.03 (2.36 to
3.82), 5.09 (4.36 to 5.90) for serious infection; 0.00 (0.00 to 0.84), 0.17 (0.05
to 0.44), 0.35 (0.18 to 0.62) for tuberculosis; 0.00 (0.00 to 0.84), 0.13 (0.03
to 0.38), 0.24 (0.10 to 0.46) for opportunistic infection; 0.00 (0.00 to 0.84),
0.00 (0.00 to 0.13), 0.12 (0.03 to 0.30) for demyelination; and 0.00 (0.00 to
0.84), 0.04 (0.00 to 0.24), 0.18 (0.06 to 0.38) for lymphoma.
CONCLUSIONS: SC golimumab safety up to 3 years remained consistent with that of
other TNF antagonists. Golimumab 100 mg showed numerically higher incidences of
serious infections, demyelinating events and lymphoma than 50 mg; safety
follow-up up to year 5 continues.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4345908
PMID: 24344160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mutat Res. 2014 Jul;765:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Individual telomere length decay in patients with spondyloarthritis.

Tamayo M(1), Pértega S(2), Mosquera A(3), Rodríguez M(3), Blanco FJ(4),
Fernández-Sueiro JL(4), Gosálvez J(5), Fernández JL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña (CHUAC), As
Xubias, 84, 15006 A Coruña, Spain; Laboratorio de Genética Molecular y
Radiobiología, Centro Oncológico de Galicia, c/ Doctor Camilo Veiras n°1, 15009 A
Coruña, Spain. (2)Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, INIBIC-Complejo
Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña (CHUAC), As Xubias, 84, 15006 A Coruña,
Spain. (3)Genetics Unit, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña
(CHUAC), As Xubias, 84, 15006 A Coruña, Spain. (4)Rheumatology Division,
INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña (CHUAC), As Xubias, 84, 15006
A Coruña, Spain. (5)Unidad de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Spain. (6)Genetics Unit, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario
Universitario A Coruña (CHUAC), As Xubias, 84, 15006 A Coruña, Spain; Laboratorio
de Genética Molecular y Radiobiología, Centro Oncológico de Galicia, c/ Doctor
Camilo Veiras n°1, 15009 A Coruña, Spain. Electronic address:
Jose.Luis.Fernandez.Garcia@sergas.es.

Telomere length was sequentially determined in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) 
from patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS; n = 44) and psoriatic arthritis
(PsA; n = 42) followed through 2.93 ± 0.99 years, using a quantitative PCR (qPCR)
assay. The initial telomere size from PsA patients was higher than those with
cutaneous psoriasis only (n = 53), possibly due to the inflammatory condition.
The qPCR assay was sensitive enough to evidence a significant telomere length
shortening in PBL from practically all subjects and PsA patients showed a higher 
rate of loss of telomere sequence than patients with AS during the follow-up
time.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Rheumatol. 2013 May;40(5):647-52. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120970. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Application and modifications of minimal disease activity measures for patients
with psoriatic arthritis treated with adalimumab: subanalyses of ADEPT.

Mease PJ(1), Heckaman M, Kary S, Kupper H.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98122, USA. pmease@philipmease.com

OBJECTIVE: This posthoc analysis evaluated the percentage of patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) who achieved minimal disease activity (MDA) and
compared the results with a modified MDA substituting the physician global
assessment (PGA) for the Psoriasis Activity and Severity Index (PASI) using data 
from the ADalimumab Effectiveness in Psoriatic Arthritis Trial (ADEPT;
NCT00646386).
METHODS: Patients with active PsA were randomized to receive adalimumab 40 mg or 
placebo every other week for 24 weeks. MDA was defined as achieving ≥ 5 of the
following criteria: tender joint count ≤ 1; swollen joint count ≤ 1; PASI ≤ 1 or 
body surface area ≤ 3%; patient pain score ≤ 15 [1-100 mm visual analog scale
(VAS)]; patient global assessment (PGA) of disease activity ≤ 20 (1-100 mm VAS); 
Health Assessment Questionnaire ≤ 0.5; and tender entheseal points ≤ 1 (only
heels assessed). For modification of the MDA, PASI ≤ 1 was substituted with PGA
"Clear" as MDAPGA1 and PGA "Clear" or "Almost clear" as MDAPGA2.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven patients were treated with adalimumab and 69 with placebo.
At Week 24, MDA, MDAPGA1, and MDAPGA2 were achieved by 39%, 37%, and 39%,
respectively, of patients treated with adalimumab versus 7%, 5%, and 8% of
patients on placebo (p < 0.001). Kappa coefficients indicated good agreement
between PASI and PGA at Week 24.
CONCLUSION: ADEPT results indicated that significantly more patients treated with
adalimumab achieved MDA by Week 24 compared with placebo. Modification of the MDA
by replacing PASI ≤ 1 with PGA assessments did not alter the results, which may
improve feasibility of practical use of the index.

PMID: 23504383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Drug Dev Res. 2014 Nov;75 Suppl 1:S57-9. doi: 10.1002/ddr.21197.

Self-reported adherence to a home-based exercise program among patients affected 
by psoriatic arthritis with minimal disease activity.

Chimenti MS(1), Triggianese P, Conigliaro P, Santoro M, Lucchetti R, Perricone R.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of "Medicina dei
Sistemi,", University of Rome "Tor Vergata,", 00133, Roma, Italy.

More than half of all patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) exhibit progressive
erosive arthritis, associated with severe functional impairment and psychosocial 
disability. Biologics have been suggested to be more effective in inducing
minimal disease activity" (MDA) than disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs). Behavioral patient education appears to be more effective in
encouraging patients to increase their physical activity (PA) levels. The aim of 
the study was to evaluate the benefits of home-based exercises program on disease
activity and quality of life in MDA-PsA patients treated with an anti-tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) and DMARD therapy. We observed a self-reported adherence
rate to home-based exercise of 76.6% and data showed the impact of the exercise
program on self-reported health and mental assessment. A positive relationship
between patient and therapist is crucial, influencing the quality of the
performance, the emotional support, and increasing motivation in PsA patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25381979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:906349. doi: 10.1155/2015/906349. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

The pharmacodynamic impact of apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor, 
on circulating levels of inflammatory biomarkers in patients with psoriatic
arthritis: substudy results from a phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial (PALACE 1).

Schafer PH(1), Chen P(2), Fang L(2), Wang A(2), Chopra R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Development, Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Avenue, Summit, NJ
07901, USA. (2)Biostatistics, Celgene Corporation, 33 Technology Drive, Warren,
NJ 07059, USA.

Apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor, demonstrated effectiveness
(versus placebo) for treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in the psoriatic
arthritis long-term assessment of clinical efficacy (PALACE) phase III clinical
trial program. Pharmacodynamic effects of apremilast on plasma biomarkers
associated with inflammation were evaluated in a PALACE 1 substudy. Of 504
patients randomized in PALACE 1, 150 (placebo: n = 51; apremilast 20 mg BID: n = 
51; apremilast 30 mg BID: n = 48) provided peripheral blood plasma samples for
analysis in a multiplexed cytometric bead array assay measuring 47 proteins
associated with systemic inflammatory immune responses. Association between
biomarker levels and achievement of 20% improvement from baseline in modified
American College of Rheumatology (ACR20) response criteria was assessed by
logistic regression. At Week 24, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-6, MIP-1β, MCP-1, and ferritin
were significantly reduced from baseline with apremilast 20 mg BID or 30 mg BID
versus placebo. ACR20 response correlated with change in TNF-α level with both
apremilast doses. At Week 40, IL-17, IL-23, IL-6, and ferritin were significantly
decreased and IL-10 and IL-1 receptor antagonists significantly increased with
apremilast 30 mg BID versus placebo. In patients with active psoriatic arthritis,
apremilast reduced circulating levels of Th1 and Th17 proinflammatory mediators
and increased anti-inflammatory mediators.

PMCID: PMC4417944
PMID: 25973439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2013 Mar 21;14:101. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-101.

The TICOPA protocol (TIght COntrol of Psoriatic Arthritis): a randomised
controlled trial to compare intensive management versus standard care in early
psoriatic arthritis.

Coates LC(1), Navarro-Coy N, Brown SR, Brown S, McParland L, Collier H, Skinner
E, Law J, Moverley A, Pavitt S, Hulme C, Emery P, Conaghan PG, Helliwell PS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Disease, Leeds Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds LS7 4SA, UK.
l.c.coates@leeds.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is estimated to occur in 10-15% of people
with psoriasis and accounts for 13% of people attending early arthritis clinics. 
With an increasing awareness of the poor outcomes associated with PsA and the
availability of new effective, but costly, treatments, there is an urgent need to
research the optimal treatment for patients with PsA. The aim of the TICOPA study
is to establish whether, in treatment naive early PsA patients, "tight control"
intensive management with protocol driven therapies and pre-defined objective
targets for treatment can improve clinical outcome compared to standard care
alone.
METHODS/DESIGN: TICOPA is a UK multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled,
parallel group trial of 206 patients with early PsA. Patients will be randomised 
on a 1:1 basis to receive either standard care (12 weekly review) or intensive
management (4 weekly review) for a period of 48 weeks. Patients assigned to the
intensive management group will follow a strict treatment protocol whereby dose
continuation/escalation is determined through the objective assessment of the
minimal disease activity (MDA) criteria. Patients assigned to the standard care
group will have treatment prescribed as felt appropriate by the treating
clinician, with no set protocol. The primary objective of the trial is to compare
intensive management with standard care in terms of the proportion of patients
achieving an ACR 20 response at 48 weeks post-randomisation, in order to
determine whether intensive management has superior clinical efficacy. Key
secondary outcomes include ACR 50 and 70, PASI 75 and X-ray Van der Heijde score 
at 48 weeks post-randomisation along with cost-effectiveness at 12, 24 and 28
weeks.
DISCUSSION: The TICOPA trial will provide direct evidence as to whether the use
of early and intensive treatment in PsA in routine clinical care leads to an
improvement in patients' disease activity and a reduction in radiological joint
damage.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN30147736, NCT01106079.

PMCID: PMC3610193
PMID: 23517506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dermatology. 2012;225(4):298-303. doi: 10.1159/000343290. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

A prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled study to identify biomarkers
associated with active treatment in psoriatic arthritis: effects of adalimumab
treatment on lesional and nonlesional skin.

de Groot M(1), Picavet DI, van Kuijk AW, Tak PP, Bos JD, de Rie MA, Teunissen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: There is a need for biomarkers to screen the effectiveness of (novel)
therapeutic agents for psoriasis at an early stage.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine which of the changes in psoriatic skin
correlates best with clinical improvement 4 weeks after effective adalimumab
therapy.
METHODS: Twenty-two psoriatic arthritis patients were randomized to receive
adalimumab or placebo. T cell numbers and markers of innate immunity were
estimated in lesional and nonlesional skin biopsies at baseline and after 4 weeks
of treatment.
RESULTS: CD161+ and elastase+ dermal cells in lesional skin were significantly
reduced upon 4 weeks of successful adalimumab treatment compared with placebo.
CONCLUSION: Early improvement of psoriasis lesions during adalimumab therapy is
associated with a marked reduction of infiltrated dermal CD161+ T cells and
elastase+ neutrophils, suggesting that these parameters could be used as
biomarkers to monitor early changes after active treatment in small
proof-of-concept studies of short duration.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23257348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Dermatol. 2013 Oct;40(10):797-804. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.12201. Epub 2013 Aug 
21.

Identification of psoriatic patients at risk of high quality of life impairment.

Sojević Timotijević Z(1), Janković S, Trajković G, Majcan P, Perišić S, Dostanić 
N, Janićijević Hudomal S, Janković J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Priština, Kosovska
Mitrovica, Serbia.

Psoriasis is a systematic chronic disease with large influence on patients'
quality of life (QoL). The aim of this study was to assess the QoL of patients
with psoriasis using generic, dermatology-specific and psoriasis-specific
instruments simultaneously, to investigate the relationships between dimensions
or subscales of the questionnaires and to identify categories of patients at risk
of a high QoL impairment. The study comprised 100 consecutive patients with
psoriasis treated at the Department of Dermatology, Clinical Center "Zvezdara",
Belgrade, from January to December 2011. Three QoL questionnaires were
administered: the EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D), the Dermatological Life Quality Index
(DLQI) and the Psoriasis Disability Index (PDI). The Psoriasis Area and Severity 
Index was used in evaluating disease severity. According to our results the QoL
of psoriatic patients was impaired (the overall DLQI and PDI scores were 10.5 ±
7.2 and 13.4 ± 8.7, respectively, while EQ visual analog scale score was 48.8 ±
25.1). The most predictive factor of QoL impairment was disease severity,
followed by sole and nail involvement. Psoriatic arthritis and bleeding were also
associated with impaired QoL. Significant correlations between the instruments
used in this study were in the expected directions. Mainly strong and moderate
significant correlations ranging 0.26-0.84 were seen between DLQI and PDI
instruments. A detailed approach to QoL assessment may give to the dermatologist 
useful information that could be of help in identifying patients belonging to
categories at risk of high QoL impairment due to psoriasis, thus guiding them in 
clinical practice.

© 2013 Japanese Dermatological Association.

PMID: 23961725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Aug;73(8):1529-36. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-203073. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Disparity between ultrasound and clinical findings in psoriatic arthritis.

Husic R(1), Gretler J(1), Felber A(1), Graninger WB(1), Duftner C(2), Hermann
J(1), Dejaco C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University Graz, Graz,
Austria. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital Kufstein, Kufstein,
Austria.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between psoriatic arthritis
(PsA)-specific clinical composite scores and ultrasound-verified pathology as
well as comparison of clinical and ultrasound definitions of remission.
METHODS: We performed a prospective study on 70 consecutive PsA patients.
Clinical assessments included components of Disease Activity Index for Psoriatic 
Arthritis (DAPSA) and the Composite Psoriatic Disease Activity Index (CPDAI).
Minimal disease activity (MDA) and the following remission criteria were applied:
CPDAI joint, entheses and dactylitis domains (CPDAI-JED)=0, DAPSA≤3.3, Boolean's 
remission definition and physician-judged remission (rem-phys). B-mode and power 
Doppler (PD-) ultrasound findings were semiquantitatively scored at 68 joints
(evaluating synovia, peritendinous tissue, tendons and bony changes) and 14
entheses. Ultrasound remission and minimal ultrasound disease activity (MUDA)
were defined as PD-score=0 and PD-score ≤1, respectively, at joints,
peritendinous tissue, tendons and entheses.
RESULTS: DAPSA but not CPDAI correlated with B-mode and PD-synovitis. Ultrasound 
signs of enthesitis, dactylitis, tenosynovitis and perisynovitis were not linked 
with clinical composites. Clinical remission or MDA was observed in 15.7% to
47.1% of PsA patients. Ultrasound remission and MUDA were present in 4.3% and
20.0% of patients, respectively. Joint and tendon-related PD-scores were higher
in patients with active versus inactive disease according to CPDAI-JED, DAPSA,
Boolean's and rem-phys, whereas no difference was observed regarding enthesitis
and perisynovitis. DAPSA≤3.3 (OR 3.9, p=0.049) and Boolean's definition (OR 4.6, 
p=0.03) were more useful to predict MUDA than other remission criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: PsA-specific composite scores partially reflect ultrasound findings.
DAPSA and Boolean's remission definitions better identify MUDA patients than
other clinical criteria.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 23740228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2014 May;66(5):749-56. doi: 10.1002/acr.22204.

Comparison of composite measures of disease activity in psoriatic arthritis using
data from an interventional study with golimumab.

Helliwell PS(1), Kavanaugh A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the performance of the Psoriatic Arthritis Disease Activity
Score (PASDAS), the Arithmetic Mean of the Desirability Function (AMDF), the
Composite Psoriatic Disease Activity Index (CPDAI), and the Disease Activity
Index for Psoriatic Arthritis (DAPSA) in the GO-REVEAL data set. The Disease
Activity Score using 28 joints (DAS28) was used as a comparator.
METHODS: The GO-REVEAL study did not allow full computation of all the composite 
scores (a modified version of CPDAI was used). The performance of the scores at
baseline and followup (weeks 14 and 24) was compared using effect sizes.
RESULTS: All indices could distinguish response to treatment at 14 and 24 weeks. 
Effect sizes at 24 weeks for the 50 mg (100 mg) golimumab doses were 2.18 (2.36),
2.08 (2.36), 1.09 (1.41), 1.80 (1.78), and 1.13 (1.18) for PASDAS, AMDF, modified
CPDAI, DAS28, and DAPSA, respectively. Comparison of 24-week values across the 3 
treatment groups (placebo, golimumab 50 mg, and golimumab 100 mg) by an analysis 
of covariance using the baseline values as covariates gave the following F
statistics: PASDAS 18.3, AMDF 19.6, modified CPDAI 9.4, DAS28 13.6, and DAPSA
7.9; all of these are highly significant. When the analysis was confined to the 2
golimumab treatment groups, there were no significant between-treatment group
differences with any of the composite measures.
CONCLUSION: PASDAS and AMDF were better able to distinguish treatment effect,
having larger effect sizes at 24 weeks. PASDAS, AMDF, and modified CPDAI better
reflected domains such as skin, enthesitis, and dactylitis.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 24127416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dermatol Ther. 2011 Jul-Aug;24(4):446-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1529-8019.2011.01439.x.

Prospective assessment of body weight and body composition changes in patients
with psoriasis receiving anti-TNF-α treatment.

Renzo LD(1), Saraceno R, Schipani C, Rizzo M, Bianchi A, Noce A, Esposito M,
Tiberti S, Chimenti S, DE Lorenzo A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Nutrition, Department of Neuroscience, University of Rome
Tor Vergata, Italy.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α is a pro-inflammatory cytokine associated with
psoriasis pathogenesis. Anti-TNF-α therapies are effective in psoriasis. A
significant weight gain has been reported in patients treated with anti-TNF-α
agents. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the body composition changes
in psoriatic patients receiving anti-TNF-α therapies according with disease
phenotype. Forty patients affected with psoriasis were followed up for 24 weeks
and divided into two groups: psoriasis vulgaris (PsO) and psoriatic arthritis
(PsA). Anthropometric, blood biochemical, body composition parameters, resting
metabolic rate, and disease activity indexes were measured at baseline and at
week 24. After 24 weeks of anti-TNF-α administration, the disease activity
indexes and concentration of inflammatory markers were significantly decreased.
Seventy-five percent of PsO and 60% of PsA patients had an increase in body
weight. Weight changes correlated with fat mass gain in the PsO group, and with
fat and lean mass gain in the PsA group. In the present study, we demonstrated
that a blockage of TNF-α bioactivity is related with fat and lean mass gain in
both PsO and PsA subjects. The anti-TNF-α therapies could play a key role in the 
cross talk between adipose tissue and skeletal muscle, mediated by the reduction 
of TNF-α and interleukin-6 production.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21910803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2013;123(6):297-302. Epub 2013 May 27.

Serum levels of angiogenic cytokines in psoriatic arthritis and SAPHO syndrome.

Przepiera-Będzak H(1), Fischer K, Brzosko M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Diseases, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland. hannapb@wp.pl

INTRODUCTION: Angiogenesis is involved in the pathogenesis of arthritis.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to assess the serum levels of selected
angiogenic cytokines and their association with clinical presentation in patients
with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and SAPHO syndrome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 98 patients: 80 with PsA and 18 with SAPHO
syndrome. The following data were recorded: age, sex, disease duration, joint
involvement, type of psoriasis, nail involvement, and treatment. The following
indices used to assess the activity of PsA and SAPHO were measured: PASI, BASDAI,
BASFI, BASMI, BASG, and VAS pain. We determined erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
C‑reactive protein (CRP), and platelet count. The serum levels of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), basic and acidic
fibroblast growth factors (FGFb and FGFa) were determined using an enzyme‑linked 
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: In patients with PsA, VEGF levels were positively correlated with CRP (P
= 0.04), BASFI (P = 0.03), and disease duration (P = 0.007). No differences were 
found between patients with and without nail psoriasis in the VEGF or EGF levels 
(P = 0.32 and P = 0.85, respectively). There were no differences between patients
with the peripheral and axial forms of arthritis in VEGF or EGF levels (P = 0.56 
and P = 0.28, respectively). No significant correlations were observed between
EGF and FGF levels and clinical presentation in patients with PsA. In patients
with SAPHO, no significant correlations were found between angiogenic cytokine
levels and clinical presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a role of VEGF in the pathogenesis of PsA. Further 
studies are required to better understand the role of angiogenic cytokines in
PsA.

PMID: 23711571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Nov;71(11):1868-71. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201897.
Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Rituximab in psoriatic arthritis: an exploratory evaluation.

Jimenez-Boj E(1), Stamm TA, Sadlonova M, Rovensky J, Raffayová H, Leeb B, Machold
KP, Graninger WB, Smolen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine III, Medical University of
Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, Vienna A-1090, Austria.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Current therapies for psoriatic arthritis (PsA) comprise
synthetic drugs and tumour necrosis factor inhibitors. In contrast, other
biologicals including rituximab (RTX) are available for treating rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). RTX is effective in autoantibody positive RA patients, although
some efficacy has been reported in seronegative individuals. RTX has not yet been
assessed in PsA. Therefore, an open label study of RTX in PsA was performed.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Nine patients with PsA and 14 with RA received RTX at 1000 
mg twice within 14 days and were evaluated over 6 months.
RESULTS: A PsA response criteria response was attained in 56% of patients. DAS28 
improved from 6.2 to 4.9 (medians) in PsA and 6.4 to 5.2 in RA, and Health
Assessment Questionnaire from 1.5 to 1.0 and from 2.1 to 1.4, respectively (all
p≤0.05). Disease Activity index for PSoriatic Arthritis changed from 52.0 to 32.5
(p<0.05); C reactive protein and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index did not change
significantly. RTX was tolerated well.
CONCLUSIONS: In this exploratory open study, RTX exhibited significant efficacy
in PsA patients with long-standing disease. Thus, RTX may have efficacy in PsA
warranting a randomised controlled clinical trial.

PMID: 22833373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2011 Feb 1;12(1):51-62. doi:
10.2165/11530640-000000000-00000.

Efficacy and safety of adalimumab among patients with moderate to severe
psoriasis with co-morbidities: Subanalysis of results from a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial.

Kimball AB(1), Bensimon AG, Guerin A, Yu AP, Wu EQ, Okun MM, Bao Y, Gupta SR,
Mulani PM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
harvardskinstudies@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is associated with a variety of major physical and mental
co-morbidities.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the incremental burden of co-morbidities on patient-reported
outcomes and evaluate the efficacy and safety of adalimumab in psoriasis patients
with co-morbidities.
STUDY DESIGN: Data were obtained from the initial 16-week, double-blind treatment
period of REVEAL (Randomized controlled EValuation of adalimumab Every other week
dosing in moderate to severe psoriasis triAL), a randomized, multicenter, phase
III clinical trial.
INTERVENTION: Patients with moderate to severe psoriasis were randomized in a
2 : 1 ratio to receive adalimumab 80 mg (two 40 mg injections administered
subcutaneously) at baseline followed by one 40 mg injection every other week from
week 1 to week 15 or placebo.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical severity (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index
[PASI]) and patient-reported outcomes (Dermatology Life Quality Index [DLQI],
Short Form 36 [SF-36] health survey, Work Productivity and Activity Impairment
[WPAI] questionnaire) were assessed during the trial. The effect of selected
co-morbidities (i.e. hypertension, psoriatic arthritis, hyperlipidemia, obesity, 
depression, other forms of arthritis, diabetes mellitus, and other cardiovascular
diseases) on patient-reported outcomes was evaluated using multivariate analysis 
of covariance models. Subgroup analyses were performed by co-morbidity type to
statistically compare the clinical efficacy, patient-reported outcome benefits,
and safety of adalimumab with placebo in the presence of these conditions.
RESULTS: Study co-morbidities were each independently associated with
significantly greater impairment on at least one general patient-reported outcome
measured at baseline (all p < 0.05), with the exception of hyperlipidemia. During
the 16-week study, adalimumab patients demonstrated significantly greater PASI 75
response rates (defined as a reduction of at least 75% in PASI scores from
baseline) compared with placebo patients for all co-morbidity subgroups.
Adalimumab provided consistent improvements in DLQI, SF-36 Physical Component
Summary and Mental Component Summary scores, and WPAI total scores from baseline 
to week 16 within co-morbidity subgroups. Rates of serious adverse events (AEs), 
serious infectious AEs, and AEs leading to discontinuation were comparable
between adalimumab and placebo for patients with co-morbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: Co-morbidities were associated with additionally impaired
health-related quality of life and work productivity in patients with psoriasis. 
Adalimumab significantly improved efficacy and patient-reported outcomes and was 
well tolerated in patients with co-morbidities.

PMID: 21110526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1157-62. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202812. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Weight loss and achievement of minimal disease activity in patients with
psoriatic arthritis starting treatment with tumour necrosis factor α blockers.

Di Minno MN(1), Peluso R, Iervolino S, Russolillo A, Lupoli R, Scarpa R; CaRRDs
Study Group.

Collaborators: Di Minno MN, Russolillo A, Di Minno A, Tarantino G, Di Minno G,
Peluso R, Scarpa R, Rubba PO, Iervolino S.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Reference Center for Coagulation Disorders, , Department of Clinical 
Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate prospectively the effect of weight loss on the
achievement of minimal disease activity (MDA) in overweight/obese patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) starting treatment with tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα)
blockers.
METHODS: Among subjects with PsA starting treatment with TNFα blockers, 138
overweight/obese patients received a concomitant dietary intervention (69 a
hypocaloric diet (HD) and 69 a free-managed diet (FD)). Changes in metabolic
variables were measured and a complete clinical rheumatological evaluation was
made in all patients at baseline and after a 6-month follow-up to define the
achievement of MDA.
RESULTS: 126 subjects completed the study. MDA was more often achieved by HD than
by FD subjects (HR=1.85, 95% CI 1.019 to 3.345, p=0.043). A diet was successful
(≥5% weight loss) in 74 (58.7%) patients. Regardless of the type of diet, after 6
months of treatment with TNFα blockers, ≥5% of weight loss was a predictor of the
achievement of MDA (OR=4.20, 95% CI 1.82 to 9.66, p<0.001). For increasing
weight-loss categories (<5%, 5-10%, >10%), MDA was achieved by 23.1%, 44.8% and
59.5%, respectively. A higher rate of MDA achievement was found in subjects with 
5-10% (OR=3.75, 95% CI 1.36 to 10.36, p=0.011) and in those with >10% (OR=6.67,
95% CI 2.41 to 18.41, p<0.001) weight loss in comparison with those with <5%
weight loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of the type of diet, a successful weight loss (≥5% from
baseline values) is associated with a higher rate of achievement of MDA in
overweight/obese patients with PsA who start treatment with TNFα blockers.

PMCID: PMC4033114
PMID: 23771989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Jan;74(1):44-51. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2014-205198. Epub
2014 Jun 18.

Improvements in productivity at paid work and within the household, and increased
participation in daily activities after 24 weeks of certolizumab pegol treatment 
of patients with psoriatic arthritis: results of a phase 3 double-blind
randomised placebo-controlled study.

Kavanaugh A(1), Gladman D(2), van der Heijde D(3), Purcaru O(4), Mease P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, UCSD, San Diego, California,
USA. (2)Division of Health Care & Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research
Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of
Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. (4)UCB
Pharma, Brussels, Belgium. (5)Swedish Medical Center and University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of certolizumab pegol (CZP) on productivity
outside and within the home, and on participation in family, social and leisure
activities in adult patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: RAPID-PsA (NCT01087788) is a phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. 409 patients with active PsA were randomised 1:1:1 to placebo, CZP 200 mg 
every 2 weeks (Q2W) or CZP 400 mg every 4 weeks (Q4W). The arthritis-specific
Work Productivity Survey (WPS) assessed the impact of PsA on paid work and
household productivity, and participation in social activities during the
preceding month. WPS responses were compared between treatment arms using a
non-parametric bootstrap-t method.
RESULTS: At baseline, 56.6%, 60.1% and 61.5% of placebo, CZP 200 mg Q2W and CZP
400 mg Q4W patients were employed. By week 24, employed CZP patients reported an 
average of 1.0-1.8 and 3.0-3.9 fewer days of absenteeism and presenteeism,
respectively, per month compared with 1.0 and 0.3 fewer days for placebo patients
(p<0.05). Within the home, by week 24, CZP patients reported an average of
3.0-3.5 household work days gained per month versus 1.0 day for placebo (p<0.05).
CZP patients also reported fewer days with reduced household productivity or days
lost for participation in family, social and leisure activities. Improvements
with CZP were seen as early as week 4 and continued to week 24.
CONCLUSIONS: CZP treatment significantly improved productivity at paid work and
within the home, and resulted in greater participation in social activities for
PsA patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01087788.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4283690
PMID: 24942382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Feb;73(2):349-56. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202646. Epub 
2013 Jan 29.

Efficacy and safety of secukinumab, a fully human anti-interleukin-17A monoclonal
antibody, in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriatic arthritis: a 24-week,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase II proof-of-concept trial.

McInnes IB(1), Sieper J, Braun J, Emery P, van der Heijde D, Isaacs JD, Dahmen G,
Wollenhaupt J, Schulze-Koops H, Kogan J, Ma S, Schumacher MM, Bertolino AP,
Hueber W, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, ,
Glasgow, UK.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2013 Jun;9(6):507-9.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of secukinumab, a fully human,
anti-interleukin (IL)-17A monoclonal antibody, in patients with psoriatic
arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: 42 patients with active PsA fulfilling ClASsification for Psoriatic
ARthritis (CASPAR) criteria were randomly assigned (2:1) to receive two
intravenous secukinumab doses (10 mg/kg; n=28) or placebo (n=14) 3 weeks apart.
The primary endpoint was the proportion of American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
20 responses at week 6 for secukinumab versus placebo (one-sided p<0.1).
RESULTS: Primary endpoint: ACR20 responses at week 6 were 39% (9/23) for
secukinumab versus 23% (3/13) for placebo (p=0.27). ACR20 responses were greater 
with secukinumab versus placebo at week 12 (39% (9/23) vs 15% (2/13), p=0.13) and
week 24 (43% (10/23) vs 18% (2/11), p= 0.14). At week 6, 'good' European League
Against Rheumatism response was seen in 21.7% (5/23) secukinumab versus 9.1%
(1/11) placebo patients. Compared with placebo at week 6, significant reductions 
were observed among secukinumab recipients for C reactive protein (p=0.039),
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (p=0.038), Health Assessment Questionnaire
Disability Index (p=0.002) and Short Form Health Survey (SF-36; p=0.030) scores. 
The overall adverse event (AE) frequency was comparable between secukinumab (26
(93%)) and placebo (11 (79%)) recipients. Six serious AEs (SAEs) were reported in
four secukinumab patients and one SAE in one placebo patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the primary endpoint was not met, clinical responses,
acute-phase reactant and quality of life improvements were greater with
secukinumab versus placebo, suggesting some clinical benefit. Secukinumab
exhibited satisfactory safety. Larger clinical trials of secukinumab in PsA are
warranted.

PMID: 23361084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2014 May-Jun;32(3):401-3. Epub 2014 May 12.

Radiological characteristics of the calcaneal spurs in psoriatic arthritis.

Gladman DD(1), Abufayyah M, Salonen D, Thavaneswaran A, Chandran V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, Toronto Western Research Institute, Psoriatic Arthritis
Program, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada. dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca.

Erratum in
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2014 Nov-Dec;32(6):996. Abuffayah, M [corrected to Abufayyah,
M].

OBJECTIVES: Inflammation at the entheses is a distinguishing feature of psoriatic
arthritis (PsA). Enthesitis at the heel is the most common location at the
Achilles and plantar fascia insertions on the calcaneus. This study aimed to 1)
describe the morphological features and measurements of plantar calcaneal spurs
in subjects with PsA and controls and 2) determine radiological features that
differentiate between inflammatory and non-inflammatory calcaneal spurs.
METHODS: Weight bearing lateral foot radiographs of 101 subjects with PsA and 38 
control subjects without inflammatory arthritis were examined for plantar
calcaneal and Achilles spurs. Three measurements were taken from each radiograph:
plantar spur base, mid-segment, and length in millimeters. The differences in
radiographic measurements, and the presence of fluffy periostitis of the plantar 
spurs were then compared between PsA patients and controls.
RESULTS: Of the 101 subjects with PsA, 76 (75%) had at least one plantar
calcaneal spur and 32 (31.5%) had at least one Achilles tendon spur, compared to 
18 (47%) and 3 (8%) respectively in control group (p=0.004). Fluffy plantar
periostitis was identified in 14 PsA subjects and none of the controls (p=0.01). 
The dimensions of plantar spurs were significantly different between groups -
longer mid-segment distinguished patients with PsA from controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Calcaneal spurs are more common in subjects with PsA than controls. 
Longer mid-segment measurement was associated with PsA. This study indicates that
the presence of fluffy plantar periostitis and broad based and longer mid-segment
dimensions are radiological features for inflammatory spurs.

PMID: 24850064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010 Aug;49(8):1578-89. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keq129. 
Epub 2010 May 6.

Clinical manifestations and responsiveness to adalimumab are similar in patients 
with ankylosing spondylitis with and without concomitant psoriasis.

Braun J(1), Rudwaleit M, Kary S, Kron M, Wong RL, Kupper H.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumazentrum Ruhrgebiet and Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
j.braun@rheumazentrum-ruhrgebiet.de

OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical manifestations of spinal disease, peripheral 
arthritis and enthesitis, and to evaluate the effectiveness of adalimumab in a
large cohort of patients with AS in relation to the presence or absence of
psoriasis.
METHODS: Patients aged > or = 18 years with active AS were enrolled in an
open-label study of adalimumab 40 mg every other week. Clinical symptoms were
measured at baseline and Week 12 using standard assessment criteria. Differences 
between patients with and those without psoriasis were assessed. The relationship
between changes in skin and AS symptoms was also analysed.
RESULTS: Of 1250 patients with AS who were enrolled in the study, 148 (11.8%) had
a history of psoriasis, including 108 patients with current (active) psoriasis at
entry. Baseline disease characteristics, including spinal structural damage,
peripheral arthritis (> or = 1 swollen joints) and enthesitis (> or = 1 inflamed 
entheses), were similar in both groups. At Week 12, Assessment of
SpondyloArthritis international Society 40% response was achieved by 46.7 and
54.7% and Bath AS Disease Activity Index 50% response by 58.6 and 57.0% of
patients with and without psoriasis, respectively. Median changes in swollen
joint scores and Maastricht AS Enthesitis Scores were similar in both groups.
Skin changes during adalimumab treatment in AS patients with a history of
psoriasis did not correlate with changes in AS symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of psoriasis had no influence on the other clinical
manifestations of patients with AS. Treatment with adalimumab markedly improved
axial disease, peripheral arthritis and enthesitis, regardless of history of
psoriasis.

PMID: 20448079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jun 12;370(24):2295-306. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1315231.

Brodalumab, an anti-IL17RA monoclonal antibody, in psoriatic arthritis.

Mease PJ(1), Genovese MC, Greenwald MW, Ritchlin CT, Beaulieu AD, Deodhar A,
Newmark R, Feng J, Erondu N, Nirula A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle
(P.J.M.); Oregon Health and Science University, Portland (A.D.); Stanford
University, Palo Alto (M.C.G.), Desert Medical Advances, Palm Desert (M.W.G.),
and Amgen, Thousand Oaks (R.N., J.Y.F., N.E., A.N.) - all in California;
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY (C.T.R.); and Laval
University, Quebec, QC, Canada (A.D.B.).

BACKGROUND: We assessed the efficacy and safety of brodalumab, a human monoclonal
antibody against interleukin-17 receptor A (IL17RA), in a phase 2, randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving patients with psoriatic
arthritis.
METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with active psoriatic arthritis to receive
brodalumab (140 or 280 mg subcutaneously) or placebo on day 1 and at weeks 1, 2, 
4, 6, 8, and 10. At week 12, patients who had not discontinued their
participation in the study were offered open-label brodalumab (280 mg) every 2
weeks. The primary end point was 20% improvement in American College of
Rheumatology response criteria (ACR 20) at week 12.
RESULTS: Of the 168 patients who underwent randomization (57 in the brodalumab
140-mg group, 56 in the brodalumab 280-mg group, and 55 in the placebo group),
159 completed the double-blind phase and 134 completed 40 weeks of the open-label
extension. At week 12, the brodalumab 140-mg and 280-mg groups had higher rates
of ACR 20 than the placebo group (37% [P=0.03] and 39% [P=0.02], respectively,
vs. 18%); they also had higher rates of 50% improvement (ACR 50) (14% [P=0.05]
and 14% [P=0.05] vs. 4%). Rates of 70% improvement were not significantly higher 
in the brodalumab groups. Similar degrees of improvement were noted among
patients who had received previous biologic therapy and those who had not
received such therapy. At week 24, ACR 20 response rates in the brodalumab 140-mg
and 280-mg groups were 51% and 64%, respectively, as compared with 44% among
patients who switched from placebo to open-label brodalumab; responses were
sustained through week 52. At week 12, serious adverse events had occurred in 3% 
of patients in the brodalumab groups and in 2% of those in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Brodalumab significantly improved response rates among patients with
psoriatic arthritis. Larger studies of longer duration are necessary to assess
adverse events. (Funded by Amgen; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01516957 .).

PMID: 24918373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Phytother Res. 2014 Mar;28(3):372-81. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5005. Epub 2013 Apr 23.

The beneficial effect of total glucosides of paeony on psoriatic arthritis links 
to circulating Tregs and Th1 cell function.

Wang YN(1), Zhang Y, Wang Y, Zhu DX, Xu LQ, Fang H, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic oncology, 1st Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, 79# Qing Chun Road, Hangzhou, 310003, China.

Total glycosides of peony (TGP) is a natural immuno-modulatory drug extracted
from traditional Chinese herb peony. It has been approved by State Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. However, data of TGP
effect on psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is still scarce. In this study, 19 patients
with PsA received 12-week treatment of TGP, and clinical efficacy in joint
manifestations was evaluated by DAS28 at weeks 0, 4, 8 and 12. Peripheral
percentages of Tregs, Th1, Th2 and NK cells were analyzed, and serum Th1-type
cytokines (IL-12, IFN-γ and TNF-α), Th2-type cytokines (IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10) as 
well as pro-inflammatory factors (IL-2, IL-6 and IL-8) were concomitantly
examined. Six patients (32%) exhibited ≥25% decrease of DAS28 (responders).
Interestingly, all responders displayed a continuous decrease in Treg and Th1
numbers during TGP treatment, concomitant with significant decreases in Th1-type 
cytokine levels. Serum IL-6 also showed a significant decline in responders.
Non-responders lacked these sequential alterations. Thus, TGP merits further
consideration as a promising therapeutic option for PsA. The result indicated
that recovery of Tregs and Th1 may serve as prognostic markers to assess
responsiveness to TGP treatment in PsA.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23610010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2014 Jul;66(7):1085-92. doi: 10.1002/acr.22256.

Effect of certolizumab pegol on multiple facets of psoriatic arthritis as
reported by patients: 24-week patient-reported outcome results of a phase III,
multicenter study.

Gladman D(1), Fleischmann R, Coteur G, Woltering F, Mease PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute and Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of certolizumab pegol (CZP) on patient-reported 
outcomes (PROs) in psoriatic arthritis (PsA) patients with and without prior
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor exposure.
METHODS: The ongoing phase III RAPID-PsA trial was double blind and placebo
controlled to week 24. Patients were randomized 1:1:1 to placebo every 2 weeks or
CZP 400 mg at weeks 0, 2, and 4, followed by either CZP 200 mg every 2 weeks or
CZP 400 mg every 4 weeks. PRO measures evaluated were the Health Assessment
Questionnaire (HAQ) disability index (DI), health status (measured by the Short
Form 36 [SF-36] health survey), Psoriatic Arthritis Quality of Life (PsAQOL),
Fatigue Assessment Scale, patient assessment of pain (visual analog scale), and
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI). Post hoc analyses of PROs in patients with
and without prior TNF inhibitor exposure were conducted. Change from baseline for
all PROs was analyzed for the randomized population using analysis of covariance 
with last observation carried forward imputation.
RESULTS: A total of 409 patients were randomized. Twenty percent had received a
prior TNF inhibitor. Baseline demographics were similar between the treatment
groups. At week 24, clinically meaningful differences in HAQ DI, SF-36, PsAQOL,
fatigue, pain, and DLQI were observed in both CZP arms versus placebo (P <
0.001), irrespective of prior TNF inhibitor exposure. More CZP-treated patients
reached SF-36 general population norms than placebo-treated patients.
CONCLUSION: Both CZP dosing schedules provided rapid improvements in PROs across 
multiple disease aspects in patients with PsA. The benefits of CZP treatment for 
health-related quality of life were seen across generic, PsA-specific, and
dermatology-specific measures and were observed in patients regardless of prior
TNF inhibitor exposure.

© 2014 The Authors. Arthritis Care & Research is published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4171746
PMID: 24339179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Rheumatol. 2013 Aug;40(8):1344-8. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.121376. Epub 2013 Jun 15.

Hand bone loss in patients with psoriatic arthritis: posthoc analysis of IMPACT
II data comparing infliximab and placebo.

Hoff M(1), Kavanaugh A, Haugeberg G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
mari.hoff@ntnu.no

OBJECTIVE: In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF)
treatment is shown to reduce but not to arrest the rate of hand bone loss. This
has not been assessed in psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Our objective was to examine 
changes in cortical hand bone density in patients with PsA treated with placebo
or infliximab (IFX).
METHODS: Patients in IMPACT II (Induction and Maintenance Psoriatic Arthritis
Clinical Trial 2) were randomized to placebo or IFX. After Week 24, all received 
IFX. In a subset of 120 patients, cortical hand bone density was assessed at
Weeks 0, 24, and 54 by digital X-ray radiogrammetry (dxr-BMD) on the same
radiographs scored for joint damage.
RESULTS: Changes from baseline to 24 weeks in dxr-BMD were -0.30% (SD 1.1%) in
the placebo group and -0.08% (SD 1.4%) in the IFX group (p = 0.63). Between
baseline and 54 weeks the changes were -0.71% (SD 2.1%) in the placebo group and 
0.15% (SD 1.7%) in the IFX group (p = 0.07), and between 24 and 54 weeks -0.41%
(SD 1.4%) and 0.23% (SD 0.8%), respectively (p = 0.05). No significant
correlation was found between change in dxr-BMD and radiographic damage.
CONCLUSION: This pilot study indicates that hand bone loss in PsA patients
treated with anti-TNF can be arrested. Assessment of hand bone density may thus
be a potential outcome measure for bone involvement and a response variable to
treatment in PsA.

PMID: 23772084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Nov;72(11):1793-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202245. Epub
2012 Nov 8.

Efficacy and safety of adalimumab for the treatment of peripheral arthritis in
spondyloarthritis patients without ankylosing spondylitis or psoriatic arthritis.

Paramarta JE(1), De Rycke L, Heijda TF, Ambarus CA, Vos K, Dinant HJ, Tak PP,
Baeten DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Academic Medical Center/
University of Amsterdam, , Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of adalimumab in patients with
peripheral spondyloarthritis (SpA) not fulfilling the criteria for ankylosing
spondylitis (AS) or psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: 40 patients with active peripheral SpA fulfilling the European
Spondyloarthropathy Study Group or Amor criteria but not the criteria for AS or
PsA were included in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Patients were treated 1 : 1 with adalimumab or placebo for 12 weeks,
followed by an open label extension up to week 24. Safety and efficacy
measurements were performed every 6 weeks, with the patient's global assessment
of disease activity at week 12 as the primary endpoint.
RESULTS: At week 12, the patient's and physician's global assessment of disease
activity, swollen joint count, Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index
(BASDAI), Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score (ASDAS) and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate improved significantly in the adalimumab group compared with
the baseline values and compared with placebo. A similar improvement was seen
upon adalimumab treatment from weeks 12 to 24 in the patients originally
randomised to placebo, whereas the clinical response was maintained or even
augmented at week 24 in the patients who received adalimumab from the start.
ASDAS inactive disease and BASDAI50 responses were met in 42% of the adalimumab
group versus 0%-5% in the placebo group at week 12 (p=0.001 and p=0.008,
respectively), and were further increased at week 24. The number of adverse
events was not different between the adalimumab and placebo groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab appears to be effective and well tolerated in SpA
patients with peripheral arthritis, also in those patients not fulfilling the AS 
or PsA criteria.

PMID: 23139265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jan;73(1):233-7. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203697. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Effect of different imputation approaches on the evaluation of radiographic
progression in patients with psoriatic arthritis: results of the RAPID-PsA
24-week phase III double-blind randomised placebo-controlled study of
certolizumab pegol.

van der Heijde D(1), Fleischmann R, Wollenhaupt J, Deodhar A, Kielar D, Woltering
F, Stach C, Hoepken B, Arledge T, Mease PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, , Leiden, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: To report the effect of different imputation methodologies on the
assessment of radiographic progression in clinical trials.
METHODS: The 216-week RAPID-psoriatic arthritis (PsA) (NCT01087788) trial of
certolizumab pegol (CZP) in patients with active PsA was double-blind and
placebo-controlled until week 24. A primary end point was change from baseline in
modified Total Sharp Score(s) (mTSS). Prespecified imputation methodology in
patients with fewer than two analysable mTSS used minimum observed baseline score
for missing baseline values and maximum observed week 24 score for missing week
24 values. Post hoc analyses used alternative methods of imputation in patients
with fewer than two analysable mTSS. mTSS non-progressors were defined as
patients with ≤0 (predefined) or ≤0.5 (post hoc) change in mTSS from baseline to 
week 24. Baseline mTSS and C-reactive protein levels as predictors of
radiographic progression were investigated.
RESULTS: 409 patients were randomised. Baseline demographics were similar between
groups. Prespecified imputation analysis inappropriately overestimated
radiographic progression (least squares mean placebo, 28.9; CZP, 18.3; p≥0.05).
Multiple post hoc analyses demonstrated that CZP inhibited radiographic
progression compared with placebo, particularly in patients with high baseline
mTSS and C-reactive protein levels. mTSS non-progression rate was higher in CZP
than placebo groups in all analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Inappropriate prespecified imputation methodology resulted in an
unrealistic assessment of progression in all arms. Methodologies for imputing
missing radiographic data can greatly affect assessment and reporting of mTSS
progression.

PMCID: PMC3888591
PMID: 23942869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Jan;72(1):83-8. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201697. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

Markers of inflammation and bone remodelling associated with improvement in
clinical response measures in psoriatic arthritis patients treated with
golimumab.

Wagner CL(1), Visvanathan S, Elashoff M, McInnes IB, Mease PJ, Krueger GG, Murphy
FT, Papp K, Gomez-Reino JJ, Mack M, Beutler A, Gladman D, Kavanaugh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Spring House,
PA, USA. cwagner@its.jnj.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine serum biomarker associations with clinical response to
golimumab treatment in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: GO-REVEAL was a randomised, placebo-controlled study of golimumab in
patients with active PsA. Samples were collected from 100 patients at baseline,
week 4 and week 14, and analysed for serum-based biomarkers and protein profiling
(total 92 markers); data were correlated with clinical measures at week 14.
RESULTS: Serum levels of a subset of proteins (apolipoprotein C III, ENRAGE,
IL-16, myeloperoxidase, vascular endothelial growth factor, pyridinoline, matrix 
metalloproteinase 3, C-reactive protein (CRP), carcinoembryonic antigen,
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 and macrophage inflammatory protein 1α) at
baseline or week 4 were strongly associated with American College of Rheumatology
20% improvement (ACR20) response and/or disease activity score in 28 joints
(DAS28) at week 14. A smaller subset of proteins was significantly associated
with a 75% improvement in the psoriasis area and severity index score (PASI75) at
week 14, (adiponectin, apolipoprotein CIII, serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase, and tumour necrosis factor α). Subsets of proteins were identified 
as potentially predictive of clinical response for each of the clinical measures,
and the power of these biomarker panels to predict clinical response to golimumab
treatment was stronger than for CRP alone.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis provides insight into several panels of markers that
may have utility in identifying PsA patients likely to have ACR20, DAS28, or
PASI75 responses following golimumab treatment.

PMCID: PMC3551220
PMID: 22975755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014 Nov;53(11):2100-9. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keu252. 
Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Impact of different infliximab dose regimens on treatment response and drug
survival in 462 patients with psoriatic arthritis: results from the nationwide
registries DANBIO and ICEBIO.

Glintborg B(1), Gudbjornsson B(1), Krogh NS(2), Omerovic E(2), Manilo N(2),
Holland-Fischer M(2), Lindegaard HM(2), Loft AG(2), Nordin H(2), Johnsen L(2),
Oeftiger SF(2), Hansen A(2), Rasmussen C(2), Grondal G(2), Geirsson AJ(2),
Hetland ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Center for Arthritis Research, Center for Rheumatology and Spine
Diseases, Danish Rheumatologic Database (DANBIO), Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup,
Denmark, Center for Rheumatology Research (ICEBIO), Landspitali University
Hospital of Iceland, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik,
Iceland, Zitelab Aps, Department of Rheumatology, Frederiksberg Hospital,
Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,
Department of Rheumatology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Department of
Rheumatology, Vejle Sygehus, Sygehus Lillebælt, Department of Infectious Diseases
and Rheumatology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology,
Helsingør and Hillerød Hospital, Hillerød, Department of Rheumatology, Køge
Hospital, Køge, Department of Rheumatology, Gentofte University Hospital,
Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology, Vendsyssel Teaching Hospital, Hjørring,
Denmark, Department of Rheumatology, Landspitali University Hospital of Iceland, 
Reykjavik, Iceland and Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Copenhagen
Center for Arthritis Research, Center for Rheumatology and Spine Diseases, Danish
Rheumatologic Database (DANBIO), Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, Center for
Rheumatology Research (ICEBIO), Landspitali University Hospital of Iceland,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, Zitelab Aps,
Department of Rheumatology, Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Department of
Rheumatology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Department of Rheumatology,
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Department of Rheumatology, Vejle Sygehus,
Sygehus Lillebælt, Department of Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology, Helsingør and Hillerød
Hospital, Hillerød, Department of Rheumatology, Køge Hospital, Køge, Department
of Rheumatology, Gentofte University Hospital, (2)Copenhagen Center for Arthritis
Research, Center for Rheumatology and Spine Diseases, Danish Rheumatologic
Database (DANBIO), Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, Center for Rheumatology 
Research (ICEBIO), Landspitali University Hospital of Iceland, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, Zitelab Aps, Department of
Rheumatology, Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology,
Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Department of Rheumatology, Odense
University Hospital, Odense, Department of Rheumatology, Vejle Sygehus, Sygehus
Lillebælt, Department of Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Department of Rheumatology, Helsingør and Hillerød Hospital,
Hillerød, Department of Rheumatology, Køge Hospital, Køge, Department of
Rheumatology, Gentofte University Hospital, Copenhagen, Department of
Rheumatology, Vendsyssel Teaching Hospital, Hjørring, Denmark, Department of
Rheumatology, Landspitali University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland and 
Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to describe dose regimens, dose escalation
and clinical outcomes in TNF-α inhibitor (TNFi)-naive patients with PsA treated
with infliximab in routine rheumatology care.
METHODS: We conducted an observational cohort study based on the nationwide
Danish Rheumatologic Database (DANBIO) and Center for Rheumatology Research
(ICEBIO) registries. Stratified by country, characteristics of patients treated
with ≤3 mg infliximab/kg body weight, 3-5 mg/kg or ≥5 mg/kg every 8 weeks were
described. Outcomes were evaluated by ACR 20%, 50% and 70% (ACR20/50/70)
responses and European League Against Rheumatism good response after 6 months,
disease activity after 12 months, Kaplan-Meier plots and regression analyses.
RESULTS: Four hundred and sixty-two patients (376 Danish, 86 Icelandic) received 
treatment with infliximab. In Danish patients, the starting dose was ≤3 mg/kg in 
110 patients (29%), 3-5 mg/kg in 157 (42%), ≥5 mg/kg in 38 (10%) and unregistered
in 71 (19%). In Icelandic patients, corresponding numbers were 64 (74%), 17
(27%), 0 (0%) and 5 (6%). Patients with a higher body weight received lower doses
per kilogram. Danish patients received higher doses than Icelandic patients at
baseline [median 3.1 (interquartile range 3.0-3.8) vs 2.3 (2.1-2.9) mg/kg, P <
0.05] and after 12 months [3.3 (3.0-4.5) vs 2.9 (2.2-3.5) mg/kg, P < 0.0001].
After 12 months, 58% of Danish and 66% of Icelandic patients maintained
treatment. Danish patients had shorter drug survival than Icelandic patients
(1183 vs 483 days). In univariate analyses stratified by country, time until dose
escalation, response rates, drug survival and 1-year's disease activity were
independent of starting dose. Drug survival was shorter among patients not
receiving concomitant MTX.
CONCLUSION: In clinical practice, > 70% of Icelandic and Danish PsA patients
treated with infliximab received sustained doses below the 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks 
recommended in international guidelines. Lower starting doses did not affect drug
survival or response.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24939677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Rheumatol. 1999 Aug;26(8):1752-6.

Baseline relationships between psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: analysis of 221
patients with active psoriatic arthritis. Department of Veterans Affairs
Cooperative Study Group on Seronegative Spondyloarthropathies.

Cohen MR(1), Reda DJ, Clegg DO.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine differences in disease onset, extent, and manifestations 
of psoriasis among patients with active, inflammatory psoriatic arthritis (PsA), 
and to examine relationships that may exist between psoriasis and PsA.
METHODS: Baseline demographic, clinical, and laboratory data were analyzed from
221 patients enrolled in a multicenter cooperative study, and relationships
between measures of psoriasis and PsA were determined.
RESULTS: Mean percentage of body surface area (BSA) affected by psoriasis was
modest (12+/-17), and mean severity of erythema, induration, and scaling was
moderate (4.9+/-2.1 on a 0-9 scale). Spanish Americans tended to have a higher
mean percentage of BSA (18.5%) than Caucasians (11%; p = 0.067), as well as
higher target lesion severity (5.55 vs. 4.84; p = 0.077). Patients with psoriatic
nail disease (180/221, 81%) had significantly greater number of involved distal
interphalangeal (DIP) joints (p = 0.004). There were no other significant
associations of skin pattern or regional involvement with PsA.
CONCLUSION: Patients with active PsA have generally mild skin disease, and
baseline relationships between psoriasis and PsA tend to be weak except for nail 
involvement and DIP joint activity.

PMID: 10451073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Mar;71(3):358-62. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200093. Epub 
2011 Oct 11.

Application of composite disease activity scores in psoriatic arthritis to the
PRESTA data set.

FitzGerald O(1), Helliwell P, Mease P, Mumtaz A, Coates L, Pedersen R, Nab H,
Molta C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, St Vincent’s University Hospital, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. oliver.fitzgerald@ucd.ie

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the performances of the Modified Composite
Psoriatic Disease Activity Index (mCPDAI) and the Disease Activity index for
PSoriatic Arthritis (DAPSA) in an interventional study of etanercept in psoriatic
arthritis.
METHODS: The components of the CPDAI and DAPSA were extracted using PRESTA
(Psoriasis Randomized Etanercept STudy in subjects with psoriatic Arthritis)
study data. Data for four of the five domains of the CPDAI-thus an mCPDAI-were
available: joints, skin, dactylitis and enthesitis (spinal involvement was not
assessed). Domains in the calculation of DAPSA were subjected to global
assessment of pain, swollen and tender joint counts, and C reactive protein.
SUBJECTS: were randomised to etanercept 50 mg weekly (n=373) or 50 mg twice
weekly (n=379) for 12 weeks; all subjects then received etanercept 50 mg weekly
for 12 weeks. The performance of the scores at baseline and on weeks 12 and 24
was compared between the two treatment regimens.
RESULTS: The mCPDAI and DAPSA could distinguish response to treatment comparing
baseline and 12-week or 24-week values (p<0.0001). The mCPDAI, not DAPSA, could
distinguish response between the two treatment groups at 12 weeks (p=0.0492), but
not at 24 weeks. All domains evaluated contributed to the data variability of the
mCPDAI; the most significant were dactylitis (r=0.64) and enthesitis (r=0.60).
CONCLUSION: In psoriatic arthritis with severe skin involvement, the mCPDAI was
able to distinguish treatment response between the two etanercept doses. DAPSA,
while demonstrating improvement in both groups over time, was unable to
distinguish response between the different doses of etanercept. Further studies
are needed to confirm the sensitivity of both indexes.

PMID: 21989542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Feb;70(2):337-40. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.135731. Epub 2010 Nov
10.

Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-blocking agents in juvenile psoriatic arthritis: are
they effective?

Otten MH(1), Prince FH, Ten Cate R, van Rossum MA, Twilt M, Hoppenreijs EP,
Koopman-Keemink Y, Oranje AP, de Waard-van der Spek FB, Gorter SL, Armbrust W,
Dolman KM, Wulffraat NM, van Suijlekom-Smit LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus MC Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. m.otten@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effectiveness of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)
blockers in juvenile psoriatic arthritis (JPsA).
METHODS: The study was a prospective ongoing multicentre, observational study of 
all Dutch juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) patients using biologicals. The
response of arthritis was assessed by American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
paediatric response and Wallace inactive disease criteria. The response of
psoriatic skin lesions was scored by a 5-point scale.
RESULTS: Eighteen JPsA patients (72% female, median age onset 11.1 (range
3.3-14.6) years, 50% psoriatic skin lesions, 39% nail pitting, 22% dactylitis)
were studied. The median follow-up time since starting anti-TNFα was 26 (range
3-62) months. Seventeen patients started on etanercept and one started on
adalimumab. After 3 months of treatment 83% of the patients achieved ACR30
response, increasing to 100% after 15 months. Inactive disease reached in 67%
after 39 months. There was no discontinuation because of inefficacy. Six patients
discontinued treatment after a good clinical response. However, five patients
flared and restarted treatment, all with a good response. During treatment four
patients (two JPsA and two JIA patients with other subtypes) developed de novo
psoriasis. In four of the nine patients the pre-existing psoriatic skin lesions
improved.
CONCLUSION: Anti-TNFα therapy in JPsA seems effective in treating arthritis.
However, in most patients the arthritis flared up after treatment
discontinuation, emphasising the need to investigate optimal therapy duration.
The psoriatic skin lesions did not respond well and four patients developed de
novo psoriasis.

PMID: 21068101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Arch Dermatol Res. 2011 Aug;303(6):399-415. doi: 10.1007/s00403-011-1133-0. Epub 
2011 Feb 17.

Antigens from Leishmania amastigotes inducing clinical remission of psoriatic
arthritis.

O'Daly JA(1), Gleason J, Lezama R, Rodriguez PJ, Silva E, Indriago NR.

Author information: 
(1)Astralis Ltd., Irvington, NJ 07111, USA. joseodaly@aol.com

A first generation vaccine (AS100-1) was manufactured with protein from four
cultured Leishmania species, which proved to be effective in the treatment of
psoriasis. A single blind trial on 3,132 psoriasis patients revealed 508 (16.2%) 
subjects with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) that received AS100-1 antigens. The study
group was distributed according to percent psoriasis area and severity index
(PASI) reduction from PASI 10 to PASI 100. All groups decreased in arthritis
score (AS), tender joints counts and nail changes after treatment; the highest
decreased in the PASI 100 group. Relapses of psoriasis and PsA had PASI and AS
lower than initial values before treatment. Clinical remissions were at lower
doses and less time, after the second course of treatment. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) lymphocyte subsets (LS) varied with PASI range (1-10,
11-20 and 21-72). Pre-treatment, absolute values of gated LS: CD4+, CD8+HLA-,
CD8+HLA+, CD8+CD3-, CD8+CD3+ decreased in PBMC as PASI increased, suggesting
migration from the blood to the skin. In contrary to the previous finding, the
following LS: CD8+CD4-, CD3+CD8-, HLA+CD8-, CD19, CD8+CD4+ and membrane surface
immunoglobulin IgA+, IgD+, IgM+, IgE+, and IgG+ increased in PBMC as PASI
increased suggesting activation and proliferation by unknown antigens creating a 
homeostatic cycle between skin/joints and peripheral blood. After nine doses of
AS100-1, the following LS: CD8+CD3+, CD8+HLA+, CD3+CD8-, CD4+CD8-, CD8+HLA-,
HLA+CD8-, CD8+CD3-, CD19+, CD8+CD4-, CD8+CD4+, IgA+, IgD+, IgM+, IgE+, and IgG+
decreased significantly as compared with values before treatment. The LS
decreased stops the vicious cycle between skin/joints and blood explaining
clinical remission of lesions.

PMID: 21328087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2010 May;24(5):530-4. doi:
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2009.03453.x. Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Treatment of nail psoriasis with adalimumab: an open label unblinded study.

Rigopoulos D(1), Gregoriou S, Lazaridou E, Belyayeva E, Apalla Z, Makris M,
Katsambas A, Ioannides D.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Dermatology, A Sygros Hospital, University of Athens Medical
School, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Despite numerous advances in the therapeutic management of cutaneous 
psoriasis, there is a lack of standardized therapeutic regimens for psoriatic
nail disease.
OBJECTIVE: An open, non-randomized, unblinded study was designed to evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of adalimumab in the treatment of nail psoriasis.
PATIENTS/METHODS: Seven patients suffering from severe plaque-type psoriasis and 
14 with psoriatic arthritis and cutaneous psoriasis with concomitant nail
involvement were enrolled into the study. The applied dose regimen of adalimumab 
was the same as the one recommended for cutaneous psoriasis. Outcome measures
were assessed at baseline and at weeks 12 and 24 using the Nail Psoriasis
Severity Index (NAPSI). Patients also filled in a Greek translation of the
international onychomycosis-specific questionnaire to assess the impact of the
nail improvement on their quality of life.
RESULTS: All 21 patients completed the study and were eligible for statistical
analysis. Significant improvement was recorded after the eighth injection. Mean
NAPSI (NAPSIm) at baseline was 10.57 +/- 1.21 for the fingernails and 14.57 +/-
2.50 for the toenails in patients with just cutaneous psoriasis and 23.86 +/-
2.00 for the fingernails and 29.29 +/- 2.87 for the toenails in patients with
psoriatic arthritis. NAPSIm at week 12 was 5.57 +/- 0.78 for the fingernails and 
9.57 +/- 2.17 for the toenails in patients with just cutaneous psoriasis and
12.86 +/- 1.05 for the fingernails and 19.21 +/- 2.07 for the toenails in
patients with psoriatic arthritis. NAPSIm after 24 weeks of treatment was 1.57
+/- 0.20 for the fingernails and 4.14 +/- 1.58 for the toenails in patients with 
cutaneous psoriasis and 3.23 +/- 0.32 for the figernails and 10.00 +/- 1.40 for
the toenails in patients with psoriatic arthritis. Treatment was well tolerated
with minimal and temporary side-effects limited to the site of injection. All
patients were satisfied, while marked improvement in their quality of life was
recorded based on the reduction of the scores obtained from the international
quality of life questionnaire.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the lack of a control group, our results demonstrate a
beneficial effect of adalimumab on psoriatic nail disease.

PMID: 19807825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Rheumatol. 2013 Jul;40(7):1158-65. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.121200. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Patient-reported Health-related Quality of Life with apremilast for psoriatic
arthritis: a phase II, randomized, controlled study.

Strand V(1), Schett G, Hu C, Stevens RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Palo Alto, California 94028, USA. vstrand@stanford.edu

OBJECTIVE: Apremilast, a specific inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4, modulates
proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokine production. A phase IIb randomized,
controlled trial (RCT) evaluated the effect of apremilast on patient-reported
outcomes (PRO) in psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In this 12-week RCT, patients with active disease (duration > 6 mo, ≥ 3 
swollen and ≥ 3 tender joints) received apremilast (20 mg BID or 40 mg QD) or
placebo. PRO included pain and global assessment of disease activity [visual
analog scale (VAS)], Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI),
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-F), and Medical
Outcomes Study Short-Form 36 Health Survey (SF-36) assessing health-related
quality of life (HRQOL). Percentages of patients reporting improvements ≥ minimum
clinically important differences (MCID) and correlations between SF-36 domains
and pain VAS, HAQ-DI, and FACIT-F were determined.
RESULTS: Among the 204 randomized patients (52.5% men; mean age 50.6 yrs),
baseline SF-36 scores reflected large impairments in HRQOL. Apremilast 20 mg BID 
resulted in statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvements in
physical and mental component summary scores and 7 and 6 SF-36 domains,
respectively, compared with no change/deterioration in placebo group. Patients
receiving apremilast 20 mg BID and 40 mg QD reported significant improvements ≥
MCID in global VAS scores and FACIT-F versus placebo, and significant
improvements in pain VAS scores. Moderate-high, significant correlations were
evident between SF-36 domains and other PRO.
CONCLUSION: Apremilast resulted in statistically significant and clinically
meaningful improvements in HRQOL, pain and global VAS, and FACIT-F scores.

PMID: 23588944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2013 Dec 19;14:358. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-358.

Evaluation of the novel ultrasound score for large joints in psoriatic arthritis 
and ankylosing spondylitis: six month experience in daily clinical practice.

Schäfer VS, Fleck M, Kellner H, Strunk J, Sattler H, Schmidt WA, Ehrenstein B,
Backhaus M, Hartung W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology / Clinical Immunology, Asklepios Clinic,
Kaiser-Karl-V-Allee 3, Bad Abbach, Germany. w.hartung@asklepios.com.

BACKGROUND: To evaluate the utility of the recently introduced SOLAR score
(sonography of large joints in Rheumatology), which has been validated in RA
patients, in a cohort of patients with Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA) and Ankylosing
Spondylitis (AS) presenting with involvement of large peripheral joints.
METHODS: The recently established SOLAR score has been designed to determine the 
degree of inflammation in the shoulder, the elbow, the hip and the knee joint in 
patients suffering from RA. Since large joints are frequently involved in PsA and
AS, synovitis and synovial vascularity were scored semiquantitatively (grade 0-3)
by grey scale (GSUS) and power Doppler ultrasound (PDUS) utilizing the validated 
scoring system. Each joint was scanned from different angles, the knee joint for 
example was divided into four areas to score for synovitis: the suprapatellar
longitudinal, the medial longitudinal, the lateral longitudinal, and the
posterior region. Each area was scored from 0-3, so a maximum score of 12 could
be achieved. PsA and AS patients presenting with peripheral joint disease
involving large joints were examined at baseline, 3 and 6 months after initiation
of local or systemic therapy (DMARDs/Biologics). For evaluation of the
inflammatory status, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was determined.
RESULTS: A cohort of 126 patients were enclosed, and 83 of these were followed
for 6 months. At baseline before modification of the therapy, patients received
DMARDs (n = 83), DMARDs plus biologics (n = 30), or biologic monotherapy (n =
29). Following intervention, all US scores demonstrated a marked improvement. The
GSUS and the PDUS scores for all joint areas, except the PDUS score of the hip,
exhibited a significant improvement (p < 0.05), while the GSUS of the knee showed
even a highly significant (p < 0.001) change. The ESR displayed a significant
decrease from 27 to 19 mm (p < 0.002) representing good treatment response.
CONCLUSION: The SOLAR score, which has been recently introduced for RA patients, 
is a very suitable instrument for the qualitative and quantitative evaluation of 
large joint involvement in PsA and AS patients and allows for treatment
monitoring.

PMCID: PMC3878335
PMID: 24351026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Aug;159(2):322-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08628.x.
Epub 2008 May 22.

Effects of etanercept on C-reactive protein levels in psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis.

Strober B(1), Teller C, Yamauchi P, Miller JL, Hooper M, Yang YC, Dann F.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Strober@nyc.rr.com

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP), an inflammation biomarker, indicates
cardiovascular risk and is elevated in psoriasis. The effect of etanercept on CRP
in psoriasis has not been previously examined.
OBJECTIVES: The primary objective was to examine the effect of etanercept on CRP 
levels from baseline to week 12 compared with placebo. Secondary objectives
included assessment of baseline CRP and relationships between CRP and body mass
index (BMI), statin drug use, and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)
scores.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted of CRP levels from patients with 
psoriasis who participated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
U.S. registrational study. Data were analysed separately if patients
self-reported psoriatic arthritis.
RESULTS: Baseline CRP levels were elevated in patients with psoriasis with and
without psoriatic arthritis. CRP was significantly reduced in both groups after
12 weeks of etanercept treatment. Patients with psoriasis with psoriatic
arthritis and patients with higher BMIs had higher median baseline CRP values and
greater reduction of CRP values compared with those without psoriatic arthritis
and those with lower BMIs. Etanercept lowered CRP levels in statin users and
nonusers. Regression analyses revealed an association between baseline PASI score
and baseline CRP independent of BMI in patients with psoriasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, with or without
psoriatic arthritis, have increased systemic inflammation demonstrated by
elevated CRP levels. In psoriasis without psoriatic arthritis, skin disease
activity is associated significantly with CRP elevation, independent of BMI, age 
and sex. Etanercept reduced CRP levels in all but the normal weight psoriasis
group without psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 18503600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Lancet. 2000 Jul 29;356(9227):385-90.

Etanercept in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis: a randomised
trial.

Mease PJ(1), Goffe BS, Metz J, VanderStoep A, Finck B, Burge DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Minor and James Medical, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. pmease@u.washington.edu

Comment in
    Lancet. 2000 Dec 16;356(9247):2095-6; author reply 2096.
    Lancet. 2000 Dec 16;356(9247):2095; author reply 2096.
    Lancet. 2000 Dec 16;356(9247):2095; author reply 2096.

BACKGROUND: Etanercept, a tumour-necrosis-factor inhibitor, has shown efficacy in
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis are
disease states in which tumour necrosis factor, a proinflammatory cytokine, is
present in increased concentrations in joints and in the skin. Therefore,
psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis may be appropriate therapeutic targets for
etanercept.
METHODS: This randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 12 week study
assessed the efficacy and safety of etanercept (25 mg twice-weekly subcutaneous
injections) or placebo in 60 patients with psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis.
Psoriatic arthritis endpoints included the proportion of patients who met the
Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC) and who met the American College of
Rheumatology preliminary criteria for improvement (ACR20). Psoriasis endpoints
included improvement in the psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) and
improvement in prospectively-identified individual target lesions.
FINDINGS: In this 12 week study, 26 (87%) of etanercept-treated patients met the 
PsARC, compared with seven (23%) of placebo-controlled patients. The ARC20 was
achieved by 22 (73%) of etanercept-treated patients compared with four (13%) of
placebo-treated patients. Of the 19 patients in each treatment group who could be
assessed for psoriasis (> or = 3% body surface area), five (26%) of
etanercept-treated patients achieved a 75% improvement in the PASI, compared with
none of the placebo-treated patients (p=0.015). The median PASI improvement was
46% in etanercept-treated patients versus 9% in placebo-treated patients;
similarly, median target lesion improvements were 50% and 0, respectively.
Etanercept was well tolerated.
INTERPRETATION: Etanercept offers patients with psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis
a new therapeutic option for control of their disease.

PMID: 10972371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Aug;57(2):269-75. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Adalimumab for severe psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: an open-label study in
30 patients previously treated with other biologics.

Papoutsaki M(1), Chimenti MS, Costanzo A, Talamonti M, Zangrilli A, Giunta A,
Bianchi L, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
marinapapoutsaki@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic, genetically determined, immune-mediated,
inflammatory skin disease affecting approximately 2% to 3% of the Caucasian
population. Previously reported data demonstrated adalimumab to be an efficacious
treatment of psoriatic arthritis and plaque-type psoriasis. Adalimumab is a fully
human monoclonal antibody IgG1 against tumor necrosis factor alpha.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of adalimumab, in the treatment of
psoriasis patients whose disease is refractory to treatment with other biologic
agents.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty patients affected by plaque-type psoriasis with or
without psoriatic arthritis, unresponsive to conventional and biologic systemic
treatments were enrolled. Adalimumab was administered in monotherapy, at a dosage
of 40 mg, subcutaneously, once a week.
RESULTS: At week 12, 26 of 30 patients (87%) achieved Psoriasis Area and Severity
Index (PASI) 75; at week 24, 25 of 30 patients (83%) achieved PASI 75. Concerning
psoriatic arthritis, at week 24, the mean Health Assessment Questionnaire score
improved from 0.99 to 0.2, Ritchie articular index from 10.15 to 2, and Pain
Visual Assessment Score from 6.32 to 1.2. Furthermore, therapy with adalimumab
considerably enhanced patients' quality of life as assessed by two measures
(Dermatology Life Quality Index, Psoriasis Disability Index). Adalimumab was
generally safe and well tolerated.
LIMITATIONS: This is not a randomized placebo-controlled study and is restricted 
to a small number of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In our experience, although preliminary, monotherapy with adalimumab
40 mg weekly proved to be an effective and safe treatment for the management of
plaque-type psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, with a rapid onset of action in
patients whose disease had been refractory to both conventional and biologic
agents.

PMID: 17574299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 Jun;32(6):277-9. doi: 10.1089/jir.2011.0120. Epub
2012 Apr 5.

Determination of lymphotoxin-alpha levels in patients with psoriatic arthritis
undergoing etanercept treatment.

Murdaca G(1), Colombo BM, Contini P, Puppo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa , Genoa, Italy.
giuseppe.murdaca@unige.it

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α plays a central role in psoriatic arthritis (PsA). 
A subgroup of patients with PsA do not respond to anti-TNF-α antibodies but
respond to TNF receptor p75-Fc IgG fusion protein (etanercept), which also
neutralizes lymphotoxin (LT)-α. It has been suggested that LT-α might be involved
in the development of the disease. We determined LT-α serum levels in 15 PsA
patients before (T0) and after 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of etanercept therapy (T3, 
T6, T9, and T12, respectively) and correlated them with their response to
treatment. Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index, Psoriasis Area
Severity Index, Disease Activity Score (DAS28), erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), and C reactive protein (CRP) levels were assessed at the same time points.
All patients showed a clinical response at T6, which persisted up to T12; ESR and
CRP mean levels significantly decreased at T3 and remained within the normal
range up to T12. LT-α levels significantly increased from T3 to T6 and returned
to baseline levels at T12. Therefore, the LT-α serum levels do not seem to
correlate with clinical and laboratory parameters of the response to etanercept
in PsA patients. Further studies are required to better define the role of LT-α
and LT-α blockade by etanercept in PsA patients.

PMID: 22480318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:174841. doi: 10.1155/2014/174841. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Involvement of the inconstant bursa of the fifth metatarsophalangeal joint in
psoriatic arthritis: a clinical and ultrasonographic study.

Ciancio G(1), Volpinari S(1), Fotinidi M(1), Furini F(1), Farina I(1), Bortoluzzi
A(1), Ferracin M(2), Bandinelli F(3), Orzincolo C(4), Trotta F(1), Govoni M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara and
S. Anna University Hospital, Via Aldo Moro 8, 44124 Cona, Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara 64/b, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Rheumatology Division, University of Florence, Viale
Pieraccini 18, 50139 Florence, Italy. (4)Department of Radiology, AUSL of
Ravenna, Viale Stradone 9, 48018 Ravenna, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the involvement of the bursa located next to the head of
the 5th metatarsal bone in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in comparison 
with the other seronegative spondyloarthritis (SpA).
METHODS: All patients with PsA seen during a period of 24 months were enrolled.
The control group included healthy subjects and patients with the other SpA. All 
subjects underwent clinical and ultrasound (US) examination of the lateral
surface of the 5th metatarsal.
RESULTS: 150 PsA patients (88 M; 62 F), 172 SpA (107 M; 65 F), and 95 healthy
controls (58 M; 37 F) were evaluated. Based on clinical and US evaluation,
bursitis was diagnosed in 17/150 (11.3%) PsA patients but in none of the SpA (P <
0.0001) and healthy (P = 0.0002) controls. In detecting bursitis, US was more
sensitive than clinical examination, although the difference did not reach
statistical significance (P = 0.09).
CONCLUSION: The bursa of the 5th metatarsophalangeal joint appears to be involved
in PsA more frequently than by chance. If confirmed by other studies, this
finding could be considered as a distinctive clinical sign of PsA, useful for
differential diagnosis with the other SpA. In asymptomatic patients, US proved to
be more sensitive in the detection of bursitis.

PMCID: PMC4100366
PMID: 25061602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2010 Jun;18 Suppl 1:S32-40. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2010.01.018. Epub 2010 May 10.

Effectiveness of chondroitin sulphate in patients with concomitant knee
osteoarthritis and psoriasis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study.

Möller I(1), Pérez M, Monfort J, Benito P, Cuevas J, Perna C, Doménech G, Herrero
M, Montell E, Vergés J.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Institute, Instituto Poal de Reumatología, Barcelona, Spain.
ingrid.moller@ipoal.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the trial was to assess the efficacy of chondroitin
sulphate (CS) on symptomatic knee osteoarthritis (OA) associated to psoriasis.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo (PBO)-controlled clinical
trial 129 patients with symptomatic knee OA and concomitant psoriasis were
randomized into two groups receiving 800 mg daily of CS or PBO for 3 months. The 
primary efficacy outcome for knee OA was the Huskisson's visual analogue scale
(VAS) and for psoriasis was the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI).
Additionally, other secondary efficacy criteria for both conditions were
assessed.
RESULTS: After 3 months of treatment, CS was more effective than PBO, relieving
pain VAS (CS -26.9+/-24.8 vs PBO -14.23+/-20.8mm, P<0.01), decreasing the
Lequesne index (CS -4.8+/-3.4 vs PBO -3.3+/-3.5, P<0.05) and reducing the number 
of patients using acetaminophen as rescue medication (CS 43% vs PBO 64%, P<0.05).
Regarding PASI, Overall Lesion Severity Scale and Physician's Global Assessment
of Change no statistically significant changes were detected in front of PBO.
However, CS improved plantar psoriasis compared to PBO (CS 87% vs PBO 27%,
P<0.05). Quality of life improved significantly in CS-treated patients according 
to the Short Form-36 health survey and the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI).
CS tolerability was excellent. Adverse events were infrequent and evenly
distributed among groups. The incidence of psoriatic flares did not increase
after treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the efficacy and safety of CS as a symptomatic
slow-acting drug in patients with knee OA and shows that CS improves plantar
psoriasis. The use of CS could represent a special benefit in patients with both 
pathologies since non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to
induce or exacerbate psoriasis.

Copyright 2010 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Apr;63(4):939-48. doi: 10.1002/art.30176.

Abatacept in the treatment of patients with psoriatic arthritis: results of a
six-month, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase II
trial.

Mease P(1), Genovese MC, Gladstein G, Kivitz AJ, Ritchlin C, Tak PP, Wollenhaupt 
J, Bahary O, Becker JC, Kelly S, Sigal L, Teng J, Gladman D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. pmease@nwlink.com

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Apr;63(4):874-6.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and efficacy of abatacept, a selective T cell
costimulation modulator, in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In this 6-month, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, phase II study, 170 PsA patients with a psoriasis target
lesion (TL) ≥2 cm who had previously taken disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs), including anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) agents, were randomized
(1:1:1:1) to receive placebo or abatacept at doses of 3 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, or 30/10
mg/kg (2 initial doses of 30 mg/kg, followed by 10 mg/kg) on days 1, 15, and 29
and then once every 28 days thereafter. The primary end point was the American
College of Rheumatology 20% criteria for improvement (ACR20 response) on day 169.
Other key end points were magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scores for joint
erosion, osteitis, and synovitis, scores on the Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ) and the Short Form-36 (SF-36) health survey, the investigator's global
assessment of psoriasis, the TL score, and the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index 
(PASI) score.
RESULTS: Proportions of patients achieving an ACR20 response were 19%, 33%, 48%, 
and 42% in the placebo, the abatacept 3 mg/kg, the abatacept 10 mg/kg, and the
abatacept 30/10 mg/kg groups, respectively. Compared with placebo, improvements
were significantly higher for the abatacept 10 mg/kg (P = 0.006) and 30/10 mg/kg 
(P = 0.022) groups, but not for 3 mg/kg group (P = 0.121). All abatacept regimens
resulted in improved MRI, HAQ, and SF-36 scores, with 10 mg/kg showing the
greatest improvements. Improvements in the TL and PASI scores were observed in
all abatacept arms; a response according to the investigator's global assessment 
was seen only with 3 mg/kg of abatacept. The safety profiles were similar among
the treatment arms.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggest that 10 mg/kg of abatacept, the
approved dosage for rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile idiopathic arthritis, may
be an effective treatment option for PsA.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21128258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004 Jul;63(7):769-73.

Early effects of tumour necrosis factor alpha blockade on skin and synovial
tissue in patients with active psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Goedkoop AY(1), Kraan MC, Teunissen MB, Picavet DI, de Rie MA, Bos JD, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Academic Medical
Centre/University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, NL-1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) blockade using infliximab, a 
chimeric anti-TNFalpha antibody, is an effective treatment for both psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: To analyse the early effects of infliximab treatment on serial skin
and synovial tissue biopsy samples.
METHODS: Twelve patients with both active psoriasis and PsA received a single
infusion of either infliximab (3 mg/kg) (n = 6) or placebo (n = 6) intravenously.
Synovial tissue and lesional skin biopsy specimens were obtained at baseline and 
48 hours after treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to analyse
the inflammatory infiltrate. In situ detection of apoptotic cells was performed
by TUNEL assay and by immunohistochemical staining with anti-caspase-3
antibodies. Stained tissue sections were evaluated by digital image analysis.
RESULTS: A significant reduction in mean (SEM) T cell numbers was found in both
lesional epidermis (baseline 37 (11) cells/mm, 48 hours 26 (11), p = 0.028) and
synovial tissue (67 (56) cells/mm(2)v 32 (30), p = 0.043) after infliximab
treatment, but not after placebo treatment (epidermis 18 (8) v 43 (20), NS;
synovium 110 (62) v 46 (21), NS). Similarly, the number of macrophages in the
synovial sublining was significantly reduced after anti-TNFalpha treatment (100
(73) v 10 (8), p = 0.043). The changes in cell numbers could not be explained by 
induction of apoptosis at the site of inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of anti-TNFalpha therapy in psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis may be explained by decreased cell infiltration in lesional skin and
inflamed synovial tissue early after initiation of treatment.

PMCID: PMC1755073
PMID: 15194570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Intern Emerg Med. 2010 Dec;5(6):495-500. doi: 10.1007/s11739-010-0458-6. Epub
2010 Sep 16.

Anti-tumor necrosis factor-α therapy and changes of flow-mediated vasodilatation 
in psoriatic and rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Mazzoccoli G(1), Notarsanto I, de Pinto GD, Dagostino MP, De Cata A, D'Alessandro
G, Tarquini R, Vendemiale G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Scientific Institute and Regional General
Hospital Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Opera di Padre Pio da Pietrelcina,
Cappuccini Avenue, 71013 S. Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy. g.mazzoccoli@tin.it

Erratum in
    Intern Emerg Med. 2011 Feb;6(1):97.

For a long time, the endothelial covering of the vessels has been considered an
inert surface. On the contrary, the endothelial cells are active and dynamic
elements in the interaction between blood and tissues. The control of the vessel 
basal tone is obtained by the complex balance between the relaxing and
contracting endothelial factors. Previous clinical studies show that patients
suffering from rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune rheumatologic
pathologies are at high risk of death being prematurely affected by
atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases. Blocking tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-α by biological drugs improves the endothelial function. The aim of our
study was to evaluate the effects of two anti-TNF-α drugs (infliximab and
etanercept) on the endothelial function by evaluating the flow-mediated
dilatation (FMD), which was measured in the brachial artery before and after
treatment and after 8-12 weeks. We enrolled 36 patients (average age
52 ± 9.8 years, 12 men and 24 women), 25 of them were affected by rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) and 11 were affected by psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and they were
divided into three groups: 10 patients were treated with etanercept, 13 patients 
were treated with infliximab, 13 patients were treated with DMARDs. We measured
the common carotid intimal-medial thickness (ccIMT) and the endothelial function 
was evaluated by FMD measurement in the brachial artery, before treatment, 1 h
after the beginning of treatment and after 8-12 weeks. No statistically
significant difference between the three groups was found for the
ultrasonographic evaluation of the carotid IMT. On the contrary, the differences 
between FMD values before and after the treatment in the patients treated with
etanercept (13.1 ± 0.01 vs. 18.8 ± 0.01%, p < 0.01) and in the patients treated
with infliximab (11.8 ± 0.09 vs. 16.7 ± 0.09%, p < 0.01) were statistically
significant. Long-term evaluation for infliximab and etanercept was performed by 
comparing the FMD values, respectively, 8 and 12 weeks after the first treatment.
After 8 weeks, FMD value was similar to the value recorded at enrollment in the
infliximab group (11.9 ± 0.03 vs. 13.54 ± 0.04%, p = 0.236) and the FMD values in
the etanercept group after 12 weeks showed a not statistically significant
reduction of vasodilatating effect (13.01 ± 0.03 vs. 15.67 ± 0.02%, p = 0.197).
In conclusion, the use of biological drugs in patients affected by autoimmune
arthritis can modify the endothelial function, as indicated by the induced FMD
changes, but the long-term effect tends to be considerably reduced.

PMID: 20845087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Apr;71(4):541-8. doi: 10.1136/ard.2011.152223. Epub 2011 Oct 
12.

Infliximab plus methotrexate is superior to methotrexate alone in the treatment
of psoriatic arthritis in methotrexate-naive patients: the RESPOND study.

Baranauskaite A(1), Raffayová H, Kungurov NV, Kubanova A, Venalis A, Helmle L,
Srinivasan S, Nasonov E, Vastesaeger N; RESPOND investigators.

Collaborators: Nasyrova R, Parsik E, Otsa K, Butrimiene I, Pileckyte M,
Tlustochowicz W, Kucharz E, Szekanecz Z, Poor G, Koo E, Hodinka L, Macejova Z,
Direskeneli H, Akkoc N, Kabasakal Y, Ertenli I, Khatib F, van Duuren EM, Spargo
C, Louw I, Codreanu C, Ionescu R, Chireac RM, Rednic S, Hammoudeh M, Szechinski
J, Rell-Bakalarska M, Avraham D, Andersone D, Keszthelyi P, Suranyi P.

Author information: 
(1)Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of treatment with infliximab plus
methotrexate with methotrexate alone in methotrexate-naive patients with active
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In this open-label study, patients 18 years and older with active PsA
who were naive to methotrexate and not receiving disease-modifying therapy
(N=115) were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive either infliximab (5 mg/kg) at
weeks 0, 2, 6 and 14 plus methotrexate (15 mg/week); or methotrexate (15 mg/week)
alone. The primary assessment was American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20
response at week 16. Secondary outcome measures included psoriasis area and
severity index (PASI), disease activity score in 28 joints (DAS28) and dactylitis
and enthesitis assessments.
RESULTS: At week 16, 86.3% of patients receiving infliximab plus methotrexate and
66.7% of those receiving methotrexate alone achieved an ACR20 response (p<0.02). 
Of patients whose baseline PASI was 2.5 or greater, 97.1% receiving infliximab
plus methotrexate compared with 54.3% receiving methotrexate alone experienced a 
75% or greater improvement in PASI (p<0.0001). Improvements in C-reactive protein
levels, DAS28 response and remission rates, dactylitis, fatigue and morning
stiffness duration were also significantly greater in the group receiving
infliximab. In the infliximab plus methotrexate group, 46% (26/57) had
treatment-related adverse events (AE) and two patients had serious AE, compared
with 24% with AE (13/54) and no serious AE in the methotrexate-alone group.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with infliximab plus methotrexate in methotrexate-naive
patients with active PsA demonstrated significantly greater ACR20 response rates 
and PASI75 improvement compared with methotrexate alone and was generally well
tolerated. This trial is registered in the US National Institutes of Health
clinicaltrials.gov database, identifier NCT00367237.

PMCID: PMC3298666
PMID: 21994233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dermatology. 2006;212(3):238-49.

Leflunomide improves psoriasis in patients with psoriatic arthritis: an in-depth 
analysis of data from the TOPAS study.

Nash P(1), Thaçi D, Behrens F, Falk F, Kaltwasser JP.

Author information: 
(1)Nambour General Hospital and University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
pnash@tpg.com.au

BACKGROUND: Leflunomide has shown promise in the treatment of psoriasis.
OBJECTIVE: To provide an in-depth analysis of the effect of leflunomide on
psoriasis in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: 190 patients with plaque psoriasis (at least 3% skin involvement) and
active PsA were randomized to double-blind treatment with leflunomide (100 mg/day
loading dose for 3 days followed by 20 mg/day orally) or placebo for 24 weeks.
RESULTS: As previously reported, leflunomide resulted in a significantly higher
Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria response rate than placebo (58.9 vs. 29.7%;
p < 0.0001). Significant differences in favor of leflunomide were also observed
in the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI 50 in 30.4% of patients vs. 18.9% 
for placebo; p = 0.05), target lesion response (46.4 vs. 25.3%; p = 0.0048),
combined skin and joint response (27.2 vs. 8.9%; p < 0.0001), Dermatology Life
Quality Index (improvement of 1.9 points vs. 0.2; p = 0.0173) and certain SF-36
subdomains. Dermatological responses were observed at the earliest examination (4
weeks) and increased throughout the 24-week study.
CONCLUSION: Once-daily oral leflunomide is an effective and convenient treatment 
for PsA and plaque psoriasis.

2006 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 16549920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dermatol Ther. 2008 Oct;21 Suppl 2:S15-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1529-8019.2008.00227.x.

Adalimumab for treatment of moderate to severe psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Bongiorno MR(1), Pistone G, Doukaki S, Aricò M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Palermo, Italy. istderm@unipa.it

Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are common diseases associated with
considerable morbidity and disability. Their pathophysiology comprises similar
processes leading to inflammation of skin, entheses, and joints. Although
traditional systemic agents can be effective, their use may be limited by lack of
efficacy and concerns regarding adverse effects. The objective of this study was 
to assess the efficacy and safety of adalimumab, a fully human antitumor necrosis
factor (anti-TNF) monoclonal antibody, over 16 weeks. The present authors report 
their personal experience in 15 patients with severe plaque psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis, refractory to other treatments, in which a decisive
regression of joint/skin involvement was obtained. Psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis are chronic inflammatory disorders resulting from a combination of
genetic and environmental factors.

PMID: 18837728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2006 Apr-Jun;31(2):109-16.

Pharmacokinetics of IL-18 binding protein in healthy volunteers and subjects with
rheumatoid arthritis or plaque psoriasis.

Tak PP(1), Bacchi M, Bertolino M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Academic Medical Centre,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

IL-18 binding protein (BP) neutralizes the activity of IL-18, a cytokine
implicated in psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We investigated the
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and safety of recombinant human IL-18 BP
(r-hIL-18 BP) in healthy volunteers and subjects with psoriasis or RA in four
phase I studies. A) Healthy volunteers (n = 24) were randomised to receive a
single subcutaneous (sc) injection of r-hIL-18 BP (20, 70, 210 or 350 mg) or
placebo. B) Healthy volunteers (n = 10) were randomised to receive six sc
injections of r-hIL-18 BP (35 or 175 mg, 48 h between injections) or placebo. C) 
Subjects with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis (n = 35) were randomised to
receive r-hIL-18 BP (20, 160 or 320 mg, sc tiw) or placebo for 6 weeks. D)
Subjects with active, moderate-to-severe RA (n = 36) were randomised to receive
r-hIL-18 BP (20, 80, 160 mg, sc tiw) or placebo for 6 weeks. Pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics and safety were assessed in all four studies. r-hIL-18 BP showed
a dose-dependent pharmacokinetic profile, with a peak serum concentration of 6-48
hours. With repeated sc injections tiw, a steady state was achieved in 1-2 weeks 
among subjects with psoriasis or RA. The majority of adverse events were mild or 
moderate in severity. Injection site reactions were the most frequently reported 
event in subjects with psoriasis or RA. r-hIL-18 BP displays dose-dependent
pharmacokinetics, has a favourable safety profile and is well-tolerated in
healthy volunteers and in subjects with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis or
active, moderate-to-severe RA.

PMID: 16898079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Rheumatol. 2011 Nov;38(11):2466-74. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110242. Epub 2011 Sep
1.

Adalimumab or cyclosporine as monotherapy and in combination in severe psoriatic 
arthritis: results from a prospective 12-month nonrandomized unblinded clinical
trial.

Karanikolas GN(1), Koukli EM, Katsalira A, Arida A, Petrou D, Komninou E,
Fragiadaki K, Zacharioudaki A, Lasithiotakis I, Giavri E, Vaiopoulos G, Sfikakis 
PP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Propedeutic and Internal Medicine, Laikon Hospital, Athens
University Medical School, Athens, Greece. gkaranikgr@yahoo.gr

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of adalimumab or cyclosporine (CYC) 
as monotherapy or combination therapy for patients with active psoriatic
arthritis (PsA), despite methotrexate (MTX) therapy.
METHODS: A prospective 12-month, nonrandomized, unblinded clinical trial of 57,
58, and 55 patients who received CYC (2.5-3.75 mg/kg/day), adalimumab (40 mg
every other week), or combination, respectively. Lowering of concomitant
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID) and corticosteroids and reductions of
adalimumab and/or CYC doses in responding patients were not restricted.
RESULTS: Mean numbers of tender/swollen joints at baseline were 9.7/6.7 in
CYC-treated, 13.0/7.8 in adalimumab-treated, and 14.5/9.4 in combination-treated 
patients, indicating lesser disease severity of patients assigned to the first
group. The Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria at 12 months were met by 65% of 
CYC-treated (p = 0.0003 in favor of combination treatment), 85% of
adalimumab-treated (p = 0.15 vs combination treatment), and 95% of
combination-treated patients, while the American College of Rheumatology-50
response rates were 36%, 69%, and 87%, respectively (p < 0.0001 and p = 0.03 in
favor of combination treatment). A significantly greater mean improvement in
Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index was achieved by combination
treatment (-1.11) vs CYC (-0.41) or adalimumab alone (-0.85). Combination therapy
significantly improved Psoriasis Area and Severity Index-50 response rates beyond
adalimumab, but not beyond the effect of CYC monotherapy. Doses of NSAID and
corticosteroids were reduced in combination-treated patients; CYC doses and
frequency of adalimumab injections were also reduced in 51% and 10% of them,
respectively. No new safety signals were observed.
CONCLUSION: The combination of adalimumab and CYC is safe and seemed to produce
major improvement in both clinical and serological variables in patients with
severely active PsA and inadequate response to MTX.

PMID: 21885499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Clin Lipidol. 2015 Jan-Feb;9(1):81-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2014.09.014. Epub
2014 Oct 5.

Elevated interleukin-10: a new cause of dyslipidemia leading to severe HDL
deficiency.

Moraitis AG(1), Freeman LA(2), Shamburek RD(2), Wesley R(3), Wilson W(4), Grant
CM(4), Price S(5), Demosky S(2), Thacker SG(2), Zarzour A(2), Hornung RL(6),
Pucino F(7), Csako G(8), Yarboro C(7), McInnes IB(9), Kuroiwa T(7), Boumpas
D(10), Rao VK(5), Illei GG(7), Remaley AT(11).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, Endocrine Oncology Program, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (2)Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA. (3)Hospital Epidemiology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
(4)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)ALPS Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Clinical Services Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, USA. (7)National
Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (8)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (9)National Institutes of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA; College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland. (10)National Institutes of Arthritis
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA; Medical School University of Athens, Affiliate Member IMBB, Heraklion
and BRFAA Athens, Greece. (11)Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch, National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA; Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA. Electronic address: aremaley1@cc.nih.gov.

Comment in
    J Clin Lipidol. 2015 Jan-Feb;9(1):91-2.

BACKGROUND: Low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) is a risk factor for
coronary artery disease. Investigating mechanisms underlying acquired severe HDL 
deficiency in noncritically ill patients ("disappearing HDL syndrome") could
provide new insights into HDL metabolism.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the cause of low HDL-C in patients with severe acquired
HDL deficiency.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients with intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (n = 2),
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (n = 1), and autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (n = 1) presenting with markedly decreased HDL-C, low low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and elevated triglycerides were identified. The 
abnormal lipoprotein profile returned to normal after therapy in all 4 patients. 
All patients were found to have markedly elevated serum interleukin-10 (IL-10)
levels that also normalized after therapy. In a cohort of autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome patients (n = 93), IL-10 showed a strong inverse
correlation with HDL-C (R(2) = 0.3720, P < .0001). A direct causal role for
increased serum IL-10 in inducing the observed changes in lipoproteins was
established in a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial of recombinant
human IL-10 in psoriatic arthritis patients (n = 18). Within a week of initiating
subcutaneous recombinant human IL-10 injections, HDL-C precipitously decreased to
near-undetectable levels. LDL-C also decreased by more than 50% (P < .0001) and
triglycerides increased by approximately 2-fold (P < .005). All values returned
to baseline after discontinuing IL-10 therapy.
CONCLUSION: Increased IL-10 causes severe HDL-C deficiency, low LDL-C, and
elevated triglycerides. IL-10 is thus a potent modulator of lipoprotein levels, a
potential new biomarker for B-cell disorders, and a novel cause of disappearing
HDL syndrome.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25670364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Rheumatol Int. 2002 Nov;22(6):227-32. Epub 2002 Sep 4.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis vulgaris with the tumor necrosis
factor inhibitor infliximab.

Cauza E(1), Spak M, Cauza K, Hanusch-Enserer U, Dunky A, Wagner E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine V, Department of Rheumatology,
Wilhelminenspital, Montleartstrasse 37, 1160 Vienna, Austria.
edmund.cauza@akh-wien.ac.at

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of multiple infusions 
with achimeric, anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha monoclonal antibody
(infliximab) in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and psoriasis vulgaris.
METHODS: Over 22 weeks, nine patients with both active psoriasis and PsA received
five infusions of 3 mg/kg infliximab. The endpoints included changes in the
swollen and tender joints counts, American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
preliminary criteria for improvement response rates 20, 50, and 70, and
improvement in the psoriasis area and severity index (PASI).
RESULTS: The swollen count (SJC) and tender joint count (TJC) fell from means of 
5.33+/-2.22 and 17.80+/-4.21 to 1.44+/-1.09 and 9.77+/-0.92, respectively, by
week 2 ( P=0.02, P=0.02). This benefit was sustained through week 22
(2.00+/-1.12/7.77+/-3.68, P=0.05/ P=0.002). The ACR 20/50/70 response was
achieved in 89%/56%/22% of cases. The mean PASI score improved from 19.04+/-5.41 
to 4.91+/-2.51 ( P=0.002).
CONCLUSION: Multiple infusions of infliximab were effective and well tolerated in
patients with active psoriasis and PsA.

PMID: 12426660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Rheumatol. 2011 Jul;38(7):1355-62. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.100698. Epub 2011 May
15.

Effectiveness and safety of etanercept in patients with psoriatic arthritis in a 
Canadian clinical practice setting: the REPArE trial.

Gladman DD(1), Bombardier C, Thorne C, Haraoui B, Khraishi M, Rahman P, Bensen W,
Syrotuik J, Poulin-Costello M.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Hospital (University of Toronto) and University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To describe the longterm effectiveness and safety of etanercept in
Canadian patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA), treated over 24 months in
clinical practice.
METHODS: Patients with active PsA (≥ 3 tender and ≥ 3 swollen joints) were
recruited from 22 centers. Etanercept was administered at 50 mg/week
subcutaneously. In addition to clinical assessment of skin and joint disease,
conducted at baseline and at Months 6, 12, 18, and 24, regular patient interviews
were conducted by telephone. Patient responses related to health status,
disability, and work productivity were scored using the patient global assessment
tool, the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), the Health and Labour
Questionnaire (HLQ), and the Fatigue Severity Scale.
RESULTS: Out of 110 patients, 71 (65%) maintained etanercept treatment through
the end of our study. All clinical measures of disease severity, including joint 
tenderness/pain, joint swelling, and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index score,
improved significantly between baseline and Month 6 of etanercept treatment and
remained constant thereafter. By the end of our study, 79% of patients achieved a
Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria response, and 56% of patients achieved a
0.5-point improvement on HAQ, indicating clinically significant improvement in
disability; 14% of patients finished our study free of disability (HAQ = 0).
Patients' work productivity and fatigue improved significantly in parallel with
these clinical and functional improvements.
CONCLUSION: Continuous treatment with etanercept over 2 years in a clinical
setting improved clinical symptoms of PsA while reducing fatigue, improving work 
productivity, and ameliorating or eliminating disability.

PMID: 21572156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Dec;63(12):3723-32. doi: 10.1002/art.30580.

Antibody response is reduced following vaccination with 7-valent conjugate
pneumococcal vaccine in adult methotrexate-treated patients with established
arthritis, but not those treated with tumor necrosis factor inhibitors.

Kapetanovic MC(1), Roseman C, Jönsson G, Truedsson L, Saxne T, Geborek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. meliha.c_kapetanovic@med.lu.se

OBJECTIVE: To study the influence of antiinflammatory treatments, including
methotrexate (MTX) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors, on antibody
response following vaccination using a 7-valent conjugate pneumococcal vaccine in
adult patients with established arthritis.
METHODS: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or spondylarthropathy (SpA)
(including psoriatic arthritis) were vaccinated (n = 505). All patients were
stratified into 6 prespecified groups based on diagnosis and treatment (RA
patients receiving MTX, RA patients receiving anti-TNF agents and MTX, RA
patients receiving TNF inhibitors as monotherapy, SpA patients receiving anti-TNF
agents and MTX, SpA patients receiving TNF inhibitors as monotherapy, and SpA
patients receiving nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs] and/or
analgesics). SpA patients receiving only NSAIDs/analgesics served as a control
group. All patients received 1 dose (0.5 ml) of vaccine intramuscularly. Levels
of IgG antibodies against 23F and 6B serotypes were measured at vaccination and
at 4-6 weeks following vaccination, using standardized enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays.
RESULTS: Positive antibody response was defined as an antibody response ratio
(ARR) (i.e., ratio of post- to prevaccination antibody levels) of ≥2. The ARR
differed significantly between the groups. A better ARR was seen among patients
in the control group compared to those in groups treated with MTX or MTX in
combination with TNF inhibitors. Among patients treated with TNF inhibitors as
monotherapy, ARRs for both serotypes were lower numerically, but were not
significantly different, compared to those in controls. Ongoing MTX treatment was
predictive of reduced response (odds ratio 0.41 [95% confidence interval
0.24-0.68], P = 0.001). Higher age was associated with impaired positive antibody
response. Concomitant prednisolone treatment elicited better positive antibody
response in patients with RA.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with MTX and higher age were predictive of an impaired
antibody response to the 7-valent conjugate pneumococcal vaccine in this cohort
of patients with chronic arthritis. TNF inhibitors did not significantly affect
antibody responses.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21834061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Rheumatol Suppl. 2012 Jul;89:90-3. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120254.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with tumor necrosis factor inhibitors:
longer-term outcomes including enthesitis and dactylitis with golimumab treatment
in the Longterm Extension of a Randomized, Placebo-controlled Study (GO-REVEAL).

Kavanaugh A(1), Mease P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, Immunology, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0943, USA. akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess longer-term outcomes, including enthesitis and dactylitis,
in patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA), in a study of golimumab
treatment.
METHODS: Adult patients with active PsA were randomized to receive subcutaneous
injections of placebo (n = 113), golimumab 50 mg (n = 146), or golimumab 100 mg
(n = 146) every 4 weeks through Week 20. All patients received golimumab 50 mg or
100 mg from Week 24 onward. Entheses tenderness was scored in 15 body sites using
the PsA-modified Maastricht Ankylosing Spondylitis Enthesitis Score (MASES).
Dactylitis was assessed in 20 digits of the hands and feet.
RESULTS: Among the 405 randomized patients, 77% presented with enthesitis and 34%
dactylitis at baseline. At Week 24 of the placebo-controlled study phase,
significant differences were observed between golimumab 50 mg and/or 100 mg and
placebo for mean percent improvement in the PsA-modified MASES [46% (p < 0.001)
and 52% (p < 0.001) vs 13%, respectively] and the dactylitis score [66% (p =
0.09) and 82% (p < 0.001) vs 28%, respectively]. By Week 52, improvements were
maintained among patients randomized to receive golimumab (mean improvements of
54% for PsA-modified MASES and 77% for the dactylitis score). Those given placebo
who had enthesitis or dactylitis at baseline and who crossed over to golimumab at
Week 16 or 24 had somewhat less improvement at Week 52 (i.e., 39% for the
PsA-modified MASES, 57% for dactylitis score).
CONCLUSION: Treatment of PsA patients with the TNF inhibitor golimumab was
effective across all components of disease, including enthesitis and dactylitis, 
and efficacy was maintained over longer-term followup.

PMID: 22751603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Rheumatol Suppl. 2012 Jul;89:61-4. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.120246.

Synovial biomarkers in psoriatic arthritis.

Fiocco U(1), Oliviero F, Sfriso P, Calabrese F, Lunardi F, Scagliori E,
Rubaltelli L, Stramare R, Di Maggio A, Nardacchione R, Cozzi L, Molena B,
Felicetti M, Gazzola K, Lo Nigro A, Accordi B, Roux-Lombard P, Dayer JM, Punzi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. ugo.fiocco@unipd.it

OBJECTIVE: To find candidate biomarkers of psoriatic arthritis (PsA). A panel of 
synovial fluid (SF) and synovial tissue (ST) biomarkers was analyzed in patients 
with resistant peripheral PsA, in relation to clinical and imaging outcomes of
synovitis response following serial intraarticular (IA) etanercept injections
(12.5 mg).
METHODS: Fourteen PsA patients with resistant knee joint synovitis were treated
with 4 IA etanercept injections in a single knee joint, once every 2 weeks.
Primary outcome (Thompson's knee index: THOMP) and secondary outcomes were
assessed at baseline and end of study: C-reactive protein, Knee Joint Articular
Index (KJAI), Health Assessment Questionnaire disability index, maximal synovial 
thickness (MST) by gray-scale ultrasonography, contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (C+MRI), ST-cluster differentiation (CD)45+ mononuclear cell,
ST-CD31+ vessels, and ST-CD105+ angiogenic endothelial cells, along with levels
of SF interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß), IL-1 receptor antagonist (Ra), and IL-6.
RESULTS: At the end of the study, clinical and imaging outcomes, ST and SF
biological markers were significantly reduced compared to baseline. There was a
significant association between IL-6 and either THOMP or KJAI; between either
ST-CD31+ or ST-CD105+ or ST-CD45+; between ST and SF biomarkers expression (CD45+
and IL-1ß) and between ST-CD45+ and both KJAI and MRI-MST. Comparing pre- versus 
post-IA etanercept injection changes (Δ), Δ IL-1ß was significantly correlated
with both Δ IL-6 and with Δ IL-1Ra and Δ IL-6 with Δ IL-1Ra.
CONCLUSION: The association to disease activity and the changes following IA
treatment indicate that ST-CD45+ and ST-CD31+, along with SF-IL-6 and SF-IL-1ß,
may represent candidate biomarkers of the knee synovitis response to IA tumor
necrosis factor-α blockade.

PMID: 22751595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Aug;64(8):2504-17. doi: 10.1002/art.34436.

Golimumab in psoriatic arthritis: one-year clinical efficacy, radiographic, and
safety results from a phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.

Kavanaugh A(1), van der Heijde D, McInnes IB, Mease P, Krueger GG, Gladman DD,
Gómez-Reino J, Papp K, Baratelle A, Xu W, Mudivarthy S, Mack M, Rahman MU, Xu Z, 
Zrubek J, Beutler A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Room A-112, La Jolla, CA 92093-0943, USA.
akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: Golimumab, administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks, has been shown
to be effective in reducing the signs and symptoms of active psoriatic arthritis 
(PsA) through week 24 of the GO-REVEAL study. Herein we report 1-year clinical,
radiographic, and safety findings.
METHODS: Adult patients with active PsA (≥3 swollen and ≥3 tender joints) were
randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous placebo, golimumab 50 mg, or golimumab 
100 mg every 4 weeks through week 20. At week 16, patients with <10% improvement 
from baseline in swollen and tender joint counts entered a blinded early escape
phase, with placebo crossover to golimumab 50 mg, golimumab 50 mg increased to
100 mg, and golimumab 100 mg continued at 100 mg. Patients receiving placebo who 
did not enter the early escape phase crossed over to golimumab 50 mg at week 24. 
Findings through 1 year are reported, including the second of 2 coprimary end
points (i.e., change from baseline to week 24 in PsA-modified Sharp/van der
Heijde score [SHS]).
RESULTS: A total of 405 patients were randomized: 113 to placebo and 146 each to 
the golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg groups. Mean changes in PsA-modified SHS from
baseline to week 24 for the combined golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg group (-0.09) and
the golimumab 50 mg group (-0.16) were significantly different versus placebo
(0.27) (P = 0.015 and P = 0.011, respectively). Radiographic benefit was
maintained through week 52 with golimumab. Clinical efficacy, including
improvement in joint and skin responses and physical function, was maintained
through 1 year. The frequency/types of adverse events were similar to those
reported through week 24.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of PsA with golimumab inhibited structural damage
progression and demonstrated continued clinical efficacy and safety through 1
year.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22378566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Int Med Res. 1990 Jan-Feb;18(1):68-73.

Effects of dietary supplementation with polyunsaturated ethyl ester lipids
(Angiosan) in patients with psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Lassus A(1), Dahlgren AL, Halpern MJ, Santalahti J, Happonen HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

A total of 80 patients with chronic, stable psoriasis, 34 of whom also had
psoriatic arthritis, were treated with 1122 mg/day eicosapentaenoic acid ethyl
ester and 756 mg/day docosahexaenoic acid ethyl ester. Before the study and after
4 and 8 weeks of treatment a Psoriatic Association scoring index (PASI) score was
assessed. Before treatment the mean PASI score was 3.56, after 4 weeks 1.98 and
after 8 weeks 1.24; the decrease in the score was highly significant (P less than
0.001). The degree of pruritus decreased most rapidly, followed by scaling and
induration of the plaques, and erythema was most persistent. At the end of the
trial, seven patients were completely healed and in 13 other patients more than
75% healing was observed but in 14 patients the result was poor. The majority of 
patients with psoriatic arthritis reported a subjective improvement in joint pain
during the study. It is concluded that polyunsaturated ethyl ester lipids may be 
useful for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis and may provide an 
important adjuvant to standard therapy of both conditions.

PMID: 2139859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dermatology. 2013;227(4):305-10. doi: 10.1159/000354263. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Golimumab in patients affected by moderate to severe psoriatic arthritis: an
open-label study in thirty-two patients previously treated with other biologics.

Chimenti MS(1), Teoli M, Saraceno R, Dattola A, Ventura A, Chiricozzi A,
Chiaramonte C, Perricone R, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, University of Rome 'Tor
Vergata', Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of golimumab (GLB) in 
improving the signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of GLB in
monotherapy in patients affected by PsA with cutaneous involvement unresponsive
to other anti-tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) agents.
METHODS: This study included 32 patients treated with GLB as monotherapy, at a
dosage of 50 mg, subcutaneously, every 4 weeks. Patients were divided into 3
groups (A, B, and C) according to their number of previous anti-TNF-α treatments 
(1, 2, or 3). Clinical and laboratory evaluations were performed at weeks 0, 12, 
and 24.
RESULTS: All patients showed significant improvement of their clinical,
inflammatory, and quality of life indexes.
CONCLUSION: Data suggest that GLB can be successful and safe in patients affected
by PsA with skin involvement previously treated with other anti-TNF-α agents.

PMID: 24280959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Rheumatol. 2011 May;38(5):898-903. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.100857. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Patient global assessment in psoriatic arthritis: a multicenter GRAPPA and
OMERACT study.

Cauli A(1), Gladman DD, Mathieu A, Olivieri I, Porru G, Tak PP, Sardu C,
Ujfalussy I, Scarpa R, Marchesoni A, Taylor WJ, Spadaro A, Fernàndez-Sueiro JL,
Salvarani C, Kalden JR, Lubrano E, Carneiro S, Desiati F, Flynn JA, D'Angelo S,
Vacca A, VAN Kuijk AW, Catanoso MG, Gruenke M, Peluso R, Parsons WJ, Ferrara N,
Contu P, Helliwell PS, Mease PJ; GRAPPA 3PPsA Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Università di Cagliari, ss 554, Monserrato,
Italy. cauli@medicina.unica.it

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2012 Mar;39(3):653; author reply 654.

OBJECTIVE: During OMERACT 8, delegates selected patient global assessment (PGA)
of disease as a domain to be evaluated in randomized controlled trials in
psoriatic arthritis (PsA). This study assessed the reliability of the PGA,
measured by means of 0-100 mm visual analog scale (VAS), and the additional
utility of separate VAS scales for joints (PJA) and skin (PSA).
METHODS: In total, 319 consecutive patients with PsA (186 men, 133 women, mean
age 51 ± 13 yrs) were enrolled. PGA, PJA, and PSA were administered at enrolment 
(W0) and after 1 week (W1). Detailed clinical data, including ACR joint count,
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale, were recorded.
RESULTS: Comparison of W0 and W1 scores showed no significant variations
(intraclass correlation coefficients for PGA 0.87, PJA 0.86, PSA 0.78),
demonstrating the reliability of the instrument. PGA scores were not influenced
by patient anxiety or depression, but were dependent on PJA and PSA (p =
0.00001). PJA was dependent on the number of swollen and tender joints (p <
0.00001). PSA scores were influenced by the extent of skin psoriasis and by hand 
skin involvement (p = 0.00001). Joint and skin disease were found not to
correlate in terms of disease activity as evidenced by the swollen joint count
compared to PASI (r = 0.11) and by the PJA compared to PSA (r = 0.38).
CONCLUSION: PGA assessed by means of VAS is a reliable tool related to joint and 
skin disease activity. Because joint and skin disease often diverge it is
suggested that in some circumstances both PJA and PSA are also assessed.

PMID: 21324965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cesk Dermatol. 1980 Feb;55(1):39-44.

[Our experience of psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis treatment with methotrexate 
(author's transl)].

[Article in Slovak]

Zbojanová M, Vlcek F, Trnavský K.

PMID: 6988086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Med Clin (Barc). 2011 Nov 26;137(14):637-9. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.12.024.
Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Evaluation of liver fibrosis by transient elastography in methotrexate treated
patients.

Barbero-Villares A(1), Mendoza J, Trapero-Marugan M, Gonzalez-Alvaro I, Daudén E,
Gisbert JP, Moreno-Otero R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Aparato Digestivo y Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Hospital Universitario de La
Princesa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Med Clin (Barc). 2011 Nov 26;137(14):642-4.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Methotrexate (MTX) safety is questioned by the risk of
inducing liver fibrosis (LF). As transient elastography (FibroScan®) is an
effective non-invasive technique to evaluate LF, our aims were to assess LF in
MTX-treated patients, to evaluate LF regarding treatment duration and cumulative 
dose, and to determine differences depending on the underlying disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Prospective study including patients with rheumatoid
arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and psoriasis treated with MTX. Hepatic
stiffness was determined by FibroScan®. The LF cut-off values were established
using METAVIR score.
RESULTS: Of 53 patients, 22 were men (41.5%), mean age was 55 (15) years, 17
(32%) had rheumatoid arthritis, 18 (34%) inflammatory bowel disease, and 18 (34%)
psoriasis. Mean MTX cumulative dose was 1,805 (1,560) mg, and mean treatment
duration was 178 weeks. Mean hepatic stiffness was 6.19 (2.43) KPa. In 49
patients (92.5%), absence/mild LF was found (F ≤ 2), and 4 patients (7.5%) had
advanced LF (F ≥ 3). Treatment duration or cumulative doses of MTX were not
associated with LF.
CONCLUSIONS: Regarding LF development, MTX therapy is safe. FibroScan® is useful 
for monitoring LF in MTX-treated patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21719043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3156-67. doi: 10.1002/art.34627.

Oral apremilast in the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis: results of a
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Schett G(1), Wollenhaupt J, Papp K, Joos R, Rodrigues JF, Vessey AR, Hu C,
Stevens R, de Vlam KL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
georg.schett@uk-erlangen.de

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of apremilast, a novel, orally
available small molecule that specifically targets phosphodiesterase 4, in the
treatment of active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: This phase II, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study included the following: a 12-week treatment phase, with patients receiving 
placebo, apremilast 20 mg twice per day, or apremilast 40 mg once per day; a
12-week treatment-extension phase, with patients in the placebo group
re-randomized to receive apremilast; and a 4-week observational phase after
treatment cessation. The primary end point was the proportion of patients
achieving the American College of Rheumatology criteria for 20% improvement
(ACR20) at week 12. Safety assessments included adverse events (AEs), physical
examinations, vital signs, laboratory parameters, and electrocardiograms.
RESULTS: Of the 204 patients with PsA who were randomized to a treatment group,
165 completed the treatment phase. At the end of the treatment phase (week 12),
43.5% of patients receiving apremilast 20 mg twice per day (P < 0.001) and 35.8% 
of those receiving 40 mg once per day (P = 0.002) achieved an ACR20 response,
compared with 11.8% of those receiving placebo. At the end of the
treatment-extension phase (week 24), >40% of patients in each group (patients
receiving apremilast 20 mg twice per day, patients receiving apremilast 40 mg
once per day, and patients in the placebo group re-randomized to receive
apremilast) achieved the ACR20 level of improvement. Most patients in the
treatment phase (84.3%) and treatment-extension phase (68.3%) reported ≥ 1 AE.
Diarrhea, headache, nausea, fatigue, and nasopharyngitis were reported most
frequently; most events were mild or moderate. No clinically relevant laboratory 
or electrocardiographic abnormalities were reported.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with apremilast at a dosage of 20 mg twice per day or 40 mg
once per day demonstrated efficacy in comparison with placebo and was generally
well tolerated in patients with active PsA. The balance of efficacy,
tolerability, and safety supports further study of apremilast in PsA.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22806399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Jun;50(6):1939-50.

Efficacy and safety of leflunomide in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis and
psoriasis: a multinational, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical
trial.

Kaltwasser JP(1), Nash P, Gladman D, Rosen CF, Behrens F, Jones P, Wollenhaupt J,
Falk FG, Mease P; Treatment of Psoriatic Arthritis Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Rheumatologie, Medizinische Klinik III, Zentrum der Innere Medizin, 
J. W. Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
kaltwasser@em.uni-frankfurt.de

OBJECTIVE: Current treatment options for psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are limited.
Leflunomide, an oral pyrimidine synthesis inhibitor, is highly effective in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and small studies have suggested similar
efficacy in PsA. We undertook this double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of leflunomide in patients with PsA and
psoriasis.
METHODS: One hundred ninety patients with active PsA and psoriasis (at least 3%
skin involvement) were randomized to receive leflunomide (100 mg/day loading dose
for 3 days followed by 20 mg/day orally) or placebo for 24 weeks. The primary
efficacy end point was the proportion of patients classified as responders by the
Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC). Additional efficacy (joint and
skin involvement), safety, and quality-of-life assessments were performed.
RESULTS: At 24 weeks, 56 of 95 leflunomide-treated patients (58.9%; 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] 48.4-68.9) and 27 of 91 placebo-treated patients
(29.7% [95% CI 20.6-40.2]) were classified as responders by the PsARC (P <
0.0001). Significant differences in favor of leflunomide were also observed in
the proportions of patients achieving modified American College of Rheumatology
20% improvement criteria, improvement in the designated psoriasis target lesion, 
and mean changes from baseline in Psoriasis Area and Severity Index scores and
quality-of-life assessments. Diarrhea and alanine aminotransferase increases
occurred at higher rates in the leflunomide group. No cases of serious liver
toxicity were observed.
CONCLUSION: Leflunomide is an effective treatment for PsA and psoriasis,
providing a safe and convenient alternative to current therapies.

PMID: 15188371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Lipids Health Dis. 2011 Aug 4;10:130. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-10-130.

Incorporation of n-3 PUFA and γ-linolenic acid in blood lipids and red blood cell
lipids together with their influence on disease activity in patients with chronic
inflammatory arthritis--a randomized controlled human intervention trial.

Dawczynski C(1), Hackermeier U, Viehweger M, Stange R, Springer M, Jahreis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Physiology, Institute of Nutrition, Friedrich
Schiller University of Jena, Dornburger Str. 24, D-07743 Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Marine n-3 fatty acids and γ-linolenic acid both have
anti-inflammatory effects and may be useful to help treat inflammatory diseases. 
The effects of these alone or combined were examined in patients with arthritis
in a randomized controlled trial.
DESIGN: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis or psoriatic arthritis were randomized
into four groups in a double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel designed study.
Patients received the respective capsules (1: 3.0 g n-3 LC-PUFA/d; 2: 3.2 g
γ-linolenic acid/d; 3: 1.6 g n-3 LC-PUFA + 1.8 g γ-linolenic acid/d; 4: 3.0 g
olive oil) for a twelve week period. Clinical status was evaluated and blood
samples were taken at the beginning and at the end of the period. Differences
before and after intervention were tested with paired t-test or with Wilcoxon
test for non-normal data distribution.
RESULTS: 60 patients (54 rheumatoid arthritis, 6 psoriatic arthritis) were
randomised, 47 finished per protocol. In group 1, the ratio of arachidonic acid
(AA)/eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) decreased from 6.5 ± 3.7 to 2.7 ± 2.1 in plasma 
lipids and from 25.1 ± 10.1 to 7.2 ± 4.7 in erythrocyte membranes (p ≤ 0.001).
There was no significant influence on AA/EPA ratio due to interventions in group 
2-4. In group 2, the intake of γ-linolenic acid resulted in a strong rise of
γ-linolenic acid and dihomo-γ-linolenic acid concentrations in plasma lipids,
cholesteryl esters, and erythrocyte membranes. The combination of n-3 LC-PUFA and
γ-linolenic acid (group 3) led to an increase of γ-linolenic acid and
dihomo-γ-linolenic acid concentrations in plasma lipids, cholesteryl esters, and 
erythrocyte mem-branes. This increase was only half of that in group 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Incorporation of eicosanoid precursor FAs was influenced by an
intake of n-3 LC-PUFA and γ-linolenic acid suggesting a possible benefit for
therapy of chronic inflammatory diseases.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials NCT01179971.

PMCID: PMC3162909
PMID: 21816071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Br J Dermatol. 2001 Mar;144(3):587-9.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with antitumour necrosis factor-alpha antibody
clears skin lesions of psoriasis resistant to treatment with methotrexate.

Ogilvie AL(1), Antoni C, Dechant C, Manger B, Kalden JR, Schuler G, Lüftl M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Medicine III, University of Erlangen,
Hartmannstr. 14, D-91052 Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In inflamed skin, keratinocytes and inflammatory cells both produce
large amounts of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) -alpha, a cytokine with broad
effects that are relevant to inflammation. Blockade of this proinflammatory
cytokine by a monoclonal anti-TNF-alpha antibody might be effectively used in the
treatment of inflammatory skin diseases.
OBJECTIVES: To gather information about the efficacy of an anti-TNF-alpha
antibody (infliximab) in the treatment of skin lesions of psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: Six patients with progressive joint disease and psoriatic skin lesions
unresponsive to methotrexate therapy were treated with anti-TNF-alpha antibody.
The Psoriasis Area and Severity Index was determined before and 10 weeks after
initiation of therapy.
RESULTS: Improvement of psoriatic skin lesions was observed in all patients. In
addition, a marked improvement of the joint disease was noted.
CONCLUSIONS: Therapy with anti-TNF-alpha antibody may be an effective treatment
regimen for both psoriatic arthritis and psoriatic skin lesions.

PMID: 11260020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Dec;17(12 Suppl 3):S218-25.

Mycophenolate mofetil treatment improves hypertension in patients with psoriasis 
and rheumatoid arthritis.

Herrera J(1), Ferrebuz A, MacGregor EG, Rodriguez-Iturbe B.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Service, Hospital Universitario, Universidad del Zulia, Maracaibo,
Estado Zulia, Venezuela.

Evidence that was obtained in several experimental models and in strains of
hypertensive rats indicates that infiltration of inflammatory cells and oxidative
stress in the kidney play a role in the induction and maintenance of
hypertension. Similar evidence is lacking in human hypertension, at least in
part, because immunosuppressive treatment is unjustified in patients with
hypertension. For addressing this issue, patients who were prescribed by their
private physicians mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) for the treatment of psoriasis or 
rheumatoid arthritis and had, in addition, grade I essential hypertension and
normal renal function were studied. Eight patients were studied before MMF was
started, during MMF treatment, and 1 mo after MMF treatment had been
discontinued. Other treatments and diet were unchanged in the three phases of the
study. MMF therapy was associated with a significant reduction in systolic,
diastolic, and mean BP. Urinary excretion of TNF-alpha was reduced progressively 
by MMF treatment and increased after MMF was discontinued. Reduction of urinary
malondialdehyde, TNF-alpha, and RANTES excretion during MMF administration did
not reach statistical significance but had a direct positive correlation with the
BP levels. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that renal immune cell
infiltration and oxidative stress play a role in human hypertension.

PMID: 17130265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Rheumatol. 2012 May;39(5):1042-6. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.111391. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Hepatic steatosis and disease activity in subjects with psoriatic arthritis
receiving tumor necrosis factor-α blockers.

Di Minno MN(1), Iervolino S, Peluso R, Russolillo A, Lupoli R, Scarpa R, Di Minno
G, Tarantino G; CaRRDS Study Group.

Collaborators: Rubba PO, De Simone B, Gentile M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Regional Reference Centre
for Coagulation Disorders, Rheumatology Research Unit, Psoriatic Arthritis
Clinic, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. dario.diminno@hotmail.it

OBJECTIVE: Little is known about tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) blockers,
disease activity, and liver steatosis (hepatic steatosis; HS) in subjects with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA). We prospectively evaluated changes in HS during
treatment with TNF-α blockers.
METHODS: In 48 patients with PsA who had evidence of HS before the beginning of
TNF-α blocker treatment, an ultrasound followup examination was performed after a
12-month treatment period with TNF-α blockers. All subjects were stratified
according to minimal disease activity (MDA) or not (n-MDA), during treatment with
TNF-α blockers. Changes in grade of HS were evaluated in parallel in 42 controls 
with HS and without PsA.
RESULTS: At baseline, no significant difference in HS score was found between PsA
subjects and controls (HS scores 1.46 ± 0.65 vs 1.62 ± 0.66, respectively; p =
0.249). At 12-month followup, a worsening HS score was found in 20 (41.7%)
patients with PsA and in 6 (14.3%) controls (p = 0.005). Overall, the grade of HS
worsening was higher in patients with PsA (0.37 ± 0.70) than in controls (0.09 ± 
0.43; p = 0.028). A significantly lower prevalence of worsening HS was found
among patients with PsA with MDA, compared with n-MDA subjects (16.7% vs 66.7%,
respectively; p = 0.001). Laboratory measures of liver function behaved
similarly. The risk of worsening HS in patients with PsA who had MDA was similar 
to that in controls (HR 1.20, 95% CI 0.34-4.33, p = 0.77), and higher in patients
who did not have MDA (HR 4.46, 95% CI 1.73-11.47, p = 0.001, regression
analysis).
CONCLUSION: Compared with patients with MDA, those with active disease after
12-month treatment with TNF-α blockers exhibited significantly higher incidence
of worsening liver steatosis.

PMID: 22422493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Aug;51(8):1368-77. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kes001. 
Epub 2012 Feb 17.

A randomized placebo-controlled trial of methotrexate in psoriatic arthritis.

Kingsley GH(1), Kowalczyk A, Taylor H, Ibrahim F, Packham JC, McHugh NJ, Mulherin
DM, Kitas GD, Chakravarty K, Tom BD, O'Keeffe AG, Maddison PJ, Scott DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, King's College London School of Medicine, King's
College London, London SE5 9RJ, UK. gabrielle.kingsley@kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2013 Apr;52(4):761-2.
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2013 Apr;52(4):761.
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Aug;51(8):1343-4.

OBJECTIVE: MTX is widely used to treat synovitis in PsA without supporting trial 
evidence. The aim of our study was to test the value of MTX in the first large
randomized placebo-controlled trial (RCT) in PsA.
METHODS: A 6-month double-blind RCT compared MTX (15 mg/week) with placebo in
active PsA. The primary outcome was PsA response criteria (PsARC). Other outcomes
included ACR20, DAS-28 and their individual components. Missing data were imputed
using multiple imputation methods. Treatments were compared using logistic
regression analysis (adjusted for age, sex, disease duration and, where
appropriate, individual baseline scores).
RESULTS: Four hundred and sixty-two patients were screened and 221 recruited. One
hundred and nine patients received MTX and 112 received placebo. Forty-four
patients were lost to follow-up (21 MTX, 23 placebo). Twenty-six patients
discontinued treatment (14 MTX, 12 placebo). Comparing MTX with placebo in all
randomized patients at 6 months showed no significant effect on PsARC [odds ratio
(OR) 1.77, 95% CI 0.97, 3.23], ACR20 (OR 2.00, 95% CI 0.65, 6.22) or DAS-28 (OR
1.70, 95% CI 0.90, 3.17). There were also no significant treatment effects on
tender and swollen joint counts, ESR, CRP, HAQ and pain. The only benefits of MTX
were reductions in patient and assessor global scores and skin scores at 6 months
(P = 0.03, P < 0.001 and P = 0.02, respectively). There were no unexpected
adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: This trial of active PsA found no evidence for MTX improving
synovitis and consequently raises questions about its classification as a
disease-modifying drug in PsA. Trial registration. Current Controlled Trials,
www.controlled-trials.com, ISRCTN:54376151.

PMCID: PMC3397466
PMID: 22344575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2009;10(5):319-24. doi: 10.2165/11310770-000000000-00000.

Efficacy and safety of etanercept in psoriasis after switching from other
treatments: an observational study.

Mazzotta A(1), Esposito M, Costanzo A, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.

Since targeted biologic treatments have been introduced for the treatment of
plaque-type psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, switching between different
medications has become necessary in selected patients, particularly after
treatment failures. To evaluate the efficacy and safety of etanercept treatment
in adult patients with psoriasis after failure to respond to other previous
therapies. In particular, the differences in efficacy profiles after switching
from traditional (cyclosporine [ciclosporin], methotrexate, retinoids, fumaric
acid esters, psoralen plus UVA therapy, corticosteroids) or biologic (infliximab,
efalizumab) treatments were analyzed. The study included 124 patients affected by
plaque-type psoriasis who received etanercept administered subcutaneously at a
dosage of 50 mg twice weekly for 12 weeks, followed by 25 mg twice weekly for an 
additional 12 weeks, and 110 patients affected by psoriatic arthritis who were
treated with etanercept 25 mg twice weekly in a continuous regimen, after a
12-week period of treatment with etanercept 50 mg twice weekly. Efficacy results 
were consistent in both groups of patients (plaque-type psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis), as expressed by the percentage of patients who achieved Psoriasis
Area and Severity Index (PASI) 50 and PASI 75 scores. Among psoriatic arthritis
patients, the mean pain Visual Analog Scale (VAS) score showed a substantial
reduction during the treatment course, from 67.2 at week 0 to 15.8 at week 24.
After 24 weeks, among patients with plaque-type psoriasis who had not previously 
received biologic therapies, 89.9% of patients achieved PASI 50 and 75.3%
achieved PASI 75, while among patients who had received biologic therapies, 69.6%
of patients achieved PASI 50 and 65.2% achieved PASI 75. In addition, 92.3% of
patients with psoriatic arthritis who had not previously received biologic
therapies achieved PASI 50 and 73.8% achieved PASI 75, while among patients who
had received biologic therapies, 45.8% of patients achieved PASI 50 and 29.2%
achieved PASI 75. Our study demonstrated that etanercept was more effective in
those patients who had not previously received other biologic therapies than in
those who had. The results of the present study indicate that etanercept may
represent a valid, effective, and well tolerated therapeutic alternative even
after failure to respond to traditional and other biologic therapies.

PMID: 19658444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Mar-Apr;29(2):217-22. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Ultrasound imaging for the rheumatologist. XXXII. Sonographic assessment of the
foot in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Delle Sedie A(1), Riente L, Filippucci E, Scirè CA, Iagnocco A, Meenagh G,
Gutierrez M, Valesini G, Montecucco C, Grassi W, Bombardieri S.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Reumatologia, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an arthropathy associated with psoriasis, which is
part of the spondyloarthropathy family, and which may present with various forms,
from mono-oligoarthritis to symmetric polyarthritis mimicking rheumatoid
arthritis. In longstanding disease, the symmetric polyarthritis is the most
common pattern of PsA, involving the small joints of hands, feet (the involvement
of which seems to be very common, ranging from 50 to 100% of patients), wrists,
ankles and knees. Other common features are represented by the inflammation of
enthesis and tendons. Its exact prevalence, in Italy, should be about 30% in
psoriatic subjects or 0.42% when considering the general population. The aims of 
our study were to investigate, by US examination, the prevalence and the features
of foot involvement in PsA and to describe their correlations with clinical
findings. Ultrasound (US) examinations were performed using a Logiq 9 (General
Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) equipped with a multifrequency linear
probe, working at 14 MHz. One hundred and eighty feet were investigated in a
total of 101 patients. Prior to US assessment, all patients underwent a clinical 
examination by an expert rheumatologist who recorded the presence/absence of
pain, tenderness (detected by palpation and/or active or passive mobilisation of 
the feet) and swelling. US finding indicative of metatarsophalangeal joint
inflammation were obtained in 77 (76.2%) patients, while only 34 (33.7%) patients
were positive to the clinical examination. This study demonstrates that US
detected a higher number of inflamed joints with respect to clinical assessment
in PsA patients.

PMID: 21504659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2009 Nov;124(5):1022-10.e1-395. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.08.046.

Effective treatment of psoriasis with etanercept is linked to suppression of
IL-17 signaling, not immediate response TNF genes.

Zaba LC(1), Suárez-Fariñas M, Fuentes-Duculan J, Nograles KE, Guttman-Yassky E,
Cardinale I, Lowes MA, Krueger JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: TNF inhibitors have revolutionized the treatment of psoriasis
vulgaris as well as psoriatic and rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn disease. Despite
our understanding that these agents block TNF, their complex mechanism of action 
in disease resolution is still unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze globally the genomic effects of TNF inhibition in patients 
with psoriasis, and to compare genomic profiles of patients who responded or did 
not respond to treatment.
METHODS: In a clinical trial using etanercept TNF inhibitor to treat psoriasis
vulgaris (n = 15), Affymetrix gene arrays were used to analyze gene profiles in
lesional skin at multiple time points during drug treatment (baseline and weeks
1, 2, 4, and 12) compared with nonlesional skin. Patients were stratified as
responders (n = 11) or nonresponders (n = 4) on the basis of histologic disease
resolution. Cluster analysis was used to define gene sets that were modulated
with similar magnitude and velocity over time.
RESULTS: In responders, 4 clusters of downregulated genes and 3 clusters of
upregulated genes were identified. Genes downmodulated most rapidly reflected
direct inhibition of myeloid lineage immune genes. Upregulated genes included the
stable dendritic cell population genes CD1c and CD207 (langerin). Comparison of
responders and nonresponders revealed rapid downmodulation of innate IL-1beta and
IL-8 sepsis cascade cytokines in both groups, but only responders downregulated
IL-17 pathway genes to baseline levels.
CONCLUSION: Although both responders and nonresponders to etanercept inactivated 
sepsis cascade cytokines, response to etanercept is dependent on inactivation of 
myeloid dendritic cell genes and inactivation of the T(H)17 immune response.

PMCID: PMC2852188
PMID: 19895991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dermatologica. 1983;166(5):250-4.

Joint involvement in psoriasis: scintigraphic, radiologic and clinical findings.

Bachmann E, Clemmensen OJ, Dyrbye M, Larsen K.

The results of a double-blind prospective study on patients with uncomplicated
psoriasis (Ps), psoriasis with arthritis (PA) and a control group (C) are
reported. The three groups were matched for age and sex. In the Ps and C groups
no significant difference of the radiographic and scintigraphic results was
found. The PA group showed significantly more scintigraphic accumulations
compared to the two other groups, but no connection between scintigraphy and
joint symptoms was found. The patients in the Ps and PA groups were treated with 
zinc sulfate per os for 8 weeks with no change in the radiographic findings. The 
PA group showed less and the Ps group more scintigraphic lesions after treatment.
During treatment a small but significant decrease in hemoglobin, serum iron and
gamma globulin was shown.

PMID: 6873418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2010 Apr;137(4 Suppl):13-5. doi:
10.1016/S0151-9638(10)70012-0.

[Psoriasis and psoriatic rheumatism: effectiveness of etanercept for cutaneous
and joint lesions].

[Article in French]

Paul C(1), Solignac M.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital Larrey, TSA 30030, 24 chemin de Pouvourville,
31059 Toulouse France.

PMID: 20510165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Arch Dermatol. 2004 Oct;140(10):1288-9.

Leflunomide in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis: a preliminary study.

Thami GP, Garg G.

PMID: 15492204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Skin Therapy Lett. 2003 Jan;8(1):1-4.

Etanercept, a TNF antagonist for treatment for psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis.

Mease PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, Division of Clinical Research, Washington,
USA.

Etanercept (Enbrel, Amgen and Wyeth), a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonist,
was approved in January 2002, for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA). The
anti-inflammatory effects of etanercept are due to its ability to bind to the
pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF, preventing it from interacting with cell-surface
receptors and rendering it biologically inactive. Etanercept was evaluated for
the treatment of PsA and psoriasis in a preliminary study of 60 patients and in a
confirmatory phase III study of 205 patients. In both studies, etanercept was
shown to be significantly superior to placebo for the treatment of PsA, evaluated
by Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC) and American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) criteria. It also was superior to placebo in improving
psoriatic skin lesions, evaluated by the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)
and target lesion scores. Side-effects were minimal; mild injection site
reactions, which resolved during continued therapy, were experienced by
approximately one-quarter of the patients. Overall, etanercept is highly
effective and well tolerated by patients with PsA, with a safety profile similar 
to that seen in rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 12728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2011 Feb;146(1):47-52.

A global approach to psoriatic patients through PASI score and Skindex-29.

Prignano F(1), Ruffo G, Ricceri F, Pescitelli L, Lotti T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine and Surgery, Division of Clinical,
Preventive and Oncologic DermatologyUniversity of Florence, Florence, Italy.
francesca.prignano@unifi.it

AIM: Psoriasis is a chronic immune-mediated inflammatory skin disorder affecting 
approximately 2% of the population worldwide. Because of its visible
manifestations and symptoms, psoriasis has profound effects on quality of life
(QoL). Our objective is to determine the clinical severity of psoriasis and its
impact on QoL in patients treated with phototherapy, traditional systemic therapy
and biological therapy.
METHODS: Patients with plaque-type psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis were
recruited at a PsoCare centre and followed up for 6 months. Psoriasis severity
was assessed based on the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score and QoL 
using the SKINDEX-29 questionnaire.
RESULTS: PASI score improved significantly in all patients after 6 months of
therapy. The greatest improvement was observed in patients receiving biological
treatments. PASI-75 was obtained by 46.9% of patients on phototherapy and 43.1%
on biological therapies. Skindex-29 results did not significantly differ among
the three treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Effective management of patients with psoriasis depends on the
appropriate assessment of both the physical and psychosocial impact of the
disease.

PMID: 21317856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Joint Bone Spine. 2012 May;79(3):324-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2011.10.005. Epub
2011 Nov 26.

Power Doppler ultrasonographic evaluation of enthesitis in psoriatic arthritis. A
multi-center study.

Iagnocco A, Spadaro A, Marchesoni A, Cauli A, De Lucia O, Gabba A, Takanen S,
Montepaone M, Perrotta FM, D'Agostino MA, Mathieu A, Valesini G.

PMID: 22119348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Feb;69(2):394-9. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.111856. Epub 2009 Oct 
7.

Effectiveness of adalimumab in treating patients with active psoriatic arthritis 
and predictors of good clinical responses for arthritis, skin and nail lesions.

Van den Bosch F(1), Manger B, Goupille P, McHugh N, Rødevand E, Holck P, van
Vollenhoven RF, Leirisalo-Repo M, Fitzgerald O, Kron M, Frank M, Kary S, Kupper
H.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Gent, Belgium. filip.vandenbosch@ugent.be

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effectiveness of adalimumab in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and identify predictors of good clinical response for
joint and skin lesions.
METHODS: Patients received adalimumab 40 mg every other week in addition to
standard therapy in this prospective, 12-week, open-label, uncontrolled study.
Four definitions of good clinical response were used: > or =50% improvement in
American College of Rheumatology response criteria (ACR50), good response
according to European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) guidelines, a > or
=3-grade improvement in Physician Global Assessment of psoriasis (PGA) and a > or
=50% improvement in the Nail Psoriasis Severity Index (NAPSI). Response
predictors were determined by logistic regression with backward elimination
(selection level was 5%).
RESULTS: Of 442 patients, 94% completed 12 weeks of treatment. At week 12, 74%,
51% and 32% of the patients had achieved ACR20, 50 and 70, respectively; 87% and 
61% experienced moderate and good responses according to EULAR criteria,
respectively. The percentage of patients with PGA results of "clear/almost clear"
increased from 34% (baseline) to 68%. The mean NAPSI score was reduced by 44%. No
new safety signals were detected. A lower Health Assessment Questionnaire
Disability Index (HAQ-DI) score, greater pain assessment, male sex and absence of
systemic glucocorticoid therapy were strongly associated with achievement of
ACR50 and good response according to EULAR criteria. In addition, greater
C-reactive protein concentration and polyarthritis predicted ACR50, and
non-involvement of large joints predicted a good response according to EULAR
criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab was effective in patients with PsA. Lower impairment of
physical function, greater pain, male sex and no systemic treatment with
glucocorticoids were factors that increased the chance of achieving a good
clinical response.

PMCID: PMC2800202
PMID: 19815494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Rheumatol. 2010 Sep;37(9):1898-906. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.100069. Epub 2010 Jul
1.

Responses to adalimumab in patients with active psoriatic arthritis who have not 
adequately responded to prior therapy: effectiveness and safety results from an
open-label study.

Gladman DD(1); ACCLAIM Study Investigators, Sampalis JS, Illouz O, Guérette B.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, 399 Bathurst Street, Room 1E-410B,
Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada. dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of adalimumab in patients
with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and an inadequate response to prior
therapy.
METHODS: Patients were treated with subcutaneous injections of adalimumab 40 mg
every other week in addition to their standard antirheumatic therapies in a
12-week, open-label study. Effectiveness evaluations at Week 12 included American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)
response rates, Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC), active dactylitis,
enthesitis, and target lesion assessment. Physical function was evaluated using
the Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-DI).
RESULTS: A total of 127 patients were enrolled. At Week 12, patients achieved
ACR20, ACR50, and ACR70 response rates of 78.0%, 55.9%, and 21.3%, respectively. 
PASI50 and PASI75 response rates were 64.7% and 47.1%. A PsARC response was
experienced by 70.1% of patients. Between baseline and Week 12, clinically and
statistically significant reductions occurred in the mean total plaque score of
the target lesion as well as in the percentages of patients with active
dactylitis and enthesitis. A mean improvement in HAQ-DI was also observed (-0.44;
p < 0.001). Three serious adverse events were reported, but none was considered
related to adalimumab therapy.
CONCLUSION: Adalimumab-treated patients achieved significant improvements in both
skin and joint manifestations of PsA, as well as in physical function. Adalimumab
was well tolerated and had a safety profile similar to that observed in other
clinical trials of adalimumab for the treatment of PsA. ClinicalTrials.gov
identifier: NCT00427362.

PMID: 20595284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Clin Rheumatol. 2012 Jan;31(1):133-7. doi: 10.1007/s10067-011-1790-6. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

Indirect comparison of etanercept, infliximab, and adalimumab for psoriatic
arthritis: mixed treatment comparison using placebo as common comparator.

Migliore A(1), Bizzi E, Broccoli S, Laganà B.

Author information: 
(1)UO of Rheumatology, S. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Via cassia 600, 00189
Rome, Italy. albertomigliore@terra.es

Comment in
    Clin Rheumatol. 2012 Jan;31(1):193-4.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a chronic inflammatory joint disorder that is
commonly associated with skin psoriatic lesions and can lead to severe
disability. Current pharmacologic therapy for PsA includes TNFα-blocking agents
for patients who are intolerant of or have an inadequate response to conventional
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Currently, there are no published
randomized controlled trials providing a head-to-head comparison of the
effectiveness of the three TNFα-blocking agents used most often to treat patients
with PsA (adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab). In this study, we have
performed the first indirect comparison among these biologic agents, in this
setting, using a mixed treatment comparison analysis of the data from pivotal
trials regarding efficacy profiles of adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab
evaluated as American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20 response. Our results
suggest that etanercept is expected to provide the greatest ACR20 response among 
the anti-TNFα agents compared with placebo in the treatment of patients with PsA 
unresponsive to conventional treatments. This analysis may be relevant for
clinical decision-making, hence improving the management of PsA patients.

PMID: 21701796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2008 Oct-Dec;22(4):233-7.

Influence of body mass index, comorbidities and prior systemic therapies on the
response of psoriasis to adalimumab: an exploratory analysis from the APHRODITE
data.

Cassano N(1), Galluccio A, De Simone C, Loconsole F, Massimino SD, Plumari A,
Dattola S, Puglisi Guerra A, Donato L, Cantoresi F, De Pita O, Fenizi G, Altamura
V, Congedo M, Pellicano R, Vena GA.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Dermatology Clinic, University of Bari, Bari Italy.

Adalimumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody directed against tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha, which is effective for the treatment of psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis (PsA). The aim of this study is to determine whether the
response of psoriasis to adalimumab treatment might be influenced by certain
particular factors, such as body mass index (BMI), history of biologic therapy,
blood hypertension and metabolic comorbidities. For this reason, an exploratory
analysis was conducted on 144 patients with psoriasis and concomitant PsA treated
with adalimumab 40 mg every other week, evaluating the influence of such factors 
on the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) response rate at week 12. Our
preliminary results suggest that the response rate at week 12, in terms of both
PASI-50 and PASI-75, appeared to be independent of the presence of hypertension
and/or metabolic comorbidities. The PASI-50 response was observed more frequently
in patients with BMI less than 30 as compared to obese patients (79% vs 58%, p = 
0.02). Previous use of anti-TNF biologics did not appear to affect per se the
rate of responders, although it was associated with a lower PASI-75 rate among
responders.

PMID: 19036225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Acta Derm Venereol. 1995 Jan;75(1):65-9.

Remission of ordinary psoriasis following a short clearance course of
cyclosporin.

Levell NJ(1), Shuster S, Munro CS, Friedmann PS.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Dermatology, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

We set out to show that the assumption is incorrect that continuous treatment
with cyclosporin is necessary in psoriasis, as this tenet forms a basis for
current recommended treatment regimens. Sixty patients with mild to moderate
plaque psoriasis were allocated at random to treatment with oral cyclosporin 5
mg/kg/day (30 patients) or topical dithranol and ultraviolet B therapy (30
patients) for up to 16 weeks until clear (median time 6 weeks cyclosporin and 8
dithranol), and the times to relapse compared. The patients were seen monthly for
up to 8 months, and the severity and the extent of psoriasis were assessed.
Relapse, defined as return of psoriasis to 50% of the area at the start of the
trial or patient demand for further treatment, was not significantly different
between the groups (hazard ratio 1.11, 95% CI 0.55-2.32). No patients suffered a 
rebound of severe disease and none relapsed in the first 8 weeks after stopping
treatment. The relapse rate was higher following cyclosporin from 8 to 28 weeks
after treatment and following dithranol from 28 to 34 weeks. The patients with
arthritis had a higher median joint severity score at relapse than prior to
treatment with cyclosporin. At the end of 8 months, 5 patients treated with
dithranol and 8 patients with cyclosporin remained clear, 75% and 67% having
relapsed. We conclude that rapid relapse does not occur after clearance of mild
to moderate plaque psoriasis with cyclosporin and the relapse rate was no
different from dithranol treatment.

PMID: 7747540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Acta Rheumatol Scand. 1966;12(4):261-6.

Serum ceruloplasmin concentration in rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing
spondylitis, psoriasis and sarcoidosis.

Koskelo P, Kekki M, Virkkunen M, Lassus A, Somer T.

PMID: 5336014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Br J Rheumatol. 1990 Feb;29(1):46-9.

Sulphasalazine in psoriatic arthritis: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.

Farr M(1), Kitas GD, Waterhouse L, Jubb R, Felix-Davies D, Bacon PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University of Birmingham.

Comment in
    Br J Rheumatol. 1990 Dec;29(6):491-2.

Sulphasalazine (SASP) is now accepted as an effective slow-acting antirheumatic
drug for treating active rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but has not been previously
evaluated in psoriatic arthritis. An earlier open study suggested that it was
well tolerated and potentially beneficial. The present double-blind
placebo-controlled trial of 30 patients has now confirmed its efficacy. Greater
improvement occurred in those patients on active treatment than on placebo, with 
more benefit being detected in those patients with the symmetrical polyarticular 
but seronegative pattern of arthritis associated with a high acute-phase
response. SASP was stopped in 26% because of side-effects but these were mild. No
exacerbation or remission of psoriasis was observed. Further studies are in
progress to determine the degree of efficacy of SASP in different clinical
subgroups of psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 1968355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995 Jan;32(1):78-88.

Low-dose short-term cyclosporine versus etretinate in psoriasis: improvement of
skin, nail, and joint involvement.

Mahrle G(1), Schulze HJ, Färber L, Weidinger G, Steigleder GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Köln, Germany.

BACKGROUND: High-dose cyclosporine therapy significantly alleviates psoriasis
within 2 to 4 weeks but is associated with a high rate of side effects. Reports
are conflicting on the frequency and promptness of relapse after discontinuation 
of cyclosporine therapy.
OBJECTIVE: Our purpose was to compare the efficacy and safety of low-dose
cyclosporine with that of etretinate and the stability of remission after
replacing cyclosporine therapy with topical anthralin during tapering of
cyclosporine.
METHODS: In a multicenter study 210 patients with moderate to severe chronic
plaque-type psoriasis were randomly assigned to treatment with cyclosporine or
etretinate. The initial dosages were 2.5 mg/kg/day for cyclosporine and 0.5
mg/kg/day for etretinate, which could be individually adjusted to 5.0 and 0.75
mg/kg/day, respectively. After a treatment phase of 10 weeks (phase 1) patients
receiving cyclosporine were again randomly assigned to a group in which
cyclosporine was replaced by topical dithranol (anthralin), or to another group
in which the drug was tapered during the next 12 weeks (phase 2). All patients
treated with etretinate discontinued therapy after 10 weeks and used topical
dithranol.
RESULTS: Mean Psoriasis Area and Severity Index decreased by 71% in the
cyclosporine group and by 47% in the etretinate group during phase 1. After 10
weeks of treatment 47% of the patients treated with cyclosporine and 10% of those
treated with etretinate showed a reduction of more than 80% in skin involvement. 
Sixty-four percent of the cyclosporine group and 48% of the etretinate group did 
not require an increase in the initial dosage, resulting in a mean daily dose of 
3.0 and 0.53 mg/kg, respectively. There was significant alleviation of nail
involvement and joint complaints in both groups. In phase 2 the increase in mean 
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index and the incidence of relapse were significantly
higher in patients in whom cyclosporine was discontinued and replaced by
dithranol than in patients in whom cyclosporine was tapered or who were
pretreated with etretinate. During treatment four patients from the cyclosporine 
group and three patients of the etretinate group discontinued the study because
of side effects.
CONCLUSION: Low-dose short-term cyclosporine therapy for psoriasis is, in
comparison with etretinate, highly effective and well tolerated. Individually
adjusted cyclosporine therapy allows the majority of patients to continue the low
dosage of 2.5 mg/kg/day and still achieve a good clinical response. Remission can
be better preserved by tapering the drug than by discontinuing treatment
abruptly.

PMID: 7822521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Feb;66(2):270-1. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Infliximab in refractory psoriatic arthritis with severe psoriasis: a 2-year
experience.

Voulgari PV, Venetsanopoulou AI, Epagelis EK, Alamanos Y, Takalou I, Drosos AA.

PMCID: PMC1798489
PMID: 17068063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2004 Sep-Dec;17(3):373-80.

Infliximab monotherapy for refractory psoriasis: preliminary results.

Cassano N(1), Loconsole F, Amoruso A, Coviello C, Filieri M, Filotico R, Del
Vecchio S, Vena GA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolato, I.D.I, I.R.C.C.S., Rome, Italy.

Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
psoriasis. Infliximab is an anti-TNF-alpha chimeric monoclonal antibody, which is
licensed for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease. Some
reports have shown the efficacy of infliximab, either in monotherapy or in
combination with methotrexate, for the treatment of psoriatic arthropathy and
psoriasis. The efficacy and tolerability of infliximab monotherapy was evaluated 
in 29 patients with moderate to severe psoriasis, unresponsive to conventional
treatments. Fourteen patients suffered from concomitant arthropathy. Patients
received intravenous infliximab, 5mg/kg, at weeks 0, 2, and 6. After this
3-dose-induction regimen, patients were followed-up at monthly intervals and
retreated with a single-dose infusion in case of relapse of signs and symptoms.
Clinical assessment was performed using the psoriasis area and severity index
(PASI) to monitor psoriasis activity; pruritus and joint pain were assessed on a 
scale of 0 to 3. A marked improvement of skin lesions and subjective symptoms was
noted in the majority of patients; an excellent reduction of PASI score (> or
=75%) was observed in 13.8% of cases at week 2, 71.4% at week 6 and 78.6% at week
10. During the follow-up period, some patients maintained satisfactory clinical
results without requiring any additional infusions. In general, skin lesions
showed a trend towards a more prolonged and sustained improvement as compared
with subjective symptoms. Treatment was well tolerated and no serious adverse
events occurred.

PMID: 15461871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Rheumatol. 2011 Nov;38(11):2461-5. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110546. Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Minimally important difference of Health Assessment Questionnaire in psoriatic
arthritis: relating thresholds of improvement in functional ability to
patient-rated importance and satisfaction.

Mease PJ(1), Woolley JM, Bitman B, Wang BC, Globe DR, Singh A.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98104, USA.
pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate changes in function as measured by Health Assessment
Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-DI) and the meaningfulness of the changes, in
importance and satisfaction, in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: HAQ-DI was assessed at baseline and at Weeks 4, 12, and 24 in a
randomized double-blind study of 205 patients with active PsA receiving
etanercept 25 mg twice weekly or placebo. Concurrently, patients rated the
importance of and satisfaction with their change in function on a 7-point scale
(1 = not at all important/satisfied; 7 = extremely important/satisfied). Mean
HAQ-DI improvement corresponding to ratings of minimally (2-3) or very (6-7)
important or satisfied was determined using a posthoc linear mixed-model
analysis. Patient importance ratings were used as an anchor to estimate minimally
important difference (MID) for HAQ-DI; distribution-based estimates were also
calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 161 patients (69 placebo; 92 etanercept) had ≥ 1 HAQ-DI
scores showing improvement from baseline and a corresponding importance or
satisfaction rating. HAQ-DI improvements corresponding to importance scale
ratings of 2 or 3 were 0.335 (95% CI 0.214, 0.455) and 0.360 (95% CI 0.263,
0.456), respectively, suggesting an MID of about 0.35. HAQ-DI improvements
corresponding to satisfaction scale ratings of 2 and 3 were 0.293 (95% CI 0.230, 
0.357) and 0.360 (95% CI 0.307, 0.413). For a given change in HAQ-DI, nearly
two-thirds of patients indicated a lower rating for satisfaction than for
importance. This trial was registered in the ClinicalTrials.gov registry
(NCT00317499).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests the MID for HAQ-DI in PsA is about 0.35. The
results may also provide insight into patient satisfaction with changes in
function and expectations for therapy.

PMID: 21885498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Invest Dermatol. 1990 Dec;95(6 Suppl):138S-141S.

Treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis with interferon gamma.

Fierlbeck G(1), Rassner G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tübingen, F.R.G.

In a placebo-controlled double-blind randomized study, 24 patients with psoriatic
arthritis were given 28 d of treatment, and in an open study, 56 patients were
treated for 9 months. We treated patients with 100 micrograms IFN gamma per
subcutaneous injections, which were given daily for the first 2 weeks and then 3 
times per week. The principal criterion for evaluation of therapeutic success on 
arthritis was improvement of the Ritchie joint pain index by at least 25% in the 
double-blind and 30% in the long-term study. In the double-blind study, the
interferon arm was superior to the placebo arm with a statistically significant, 
one-side error probability of less than 5% in the chi-square test. In the
long-term study, IFN gamma caused an improvement in a portion of patients in the 
first 3 months of therapy. No further improvement was observed after the third
month, and patients classified as responders in the first months showed a
deterioration of the disease by continuing treatment. The humoral inflammatory
parameters did not normalize during therapy. Regression of the skin
manifestations could not be observed. IFN gamma is evidently capable of inducing 
a psoriasis on the injection site. Investigations of IFN gamma serum levels, IFN 
antibodies, 2'-5' A synthetase levels in serum, and mononuclear blood cells and
NK cell activity under long-term therapy showed no explanation for the loss of
efficacy after 3 months treatment.

PMID: 2124243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Curr Med Res Opin. 2010 Oct;26(10):2385-92. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.515804.

Effect of ustekinumab on physical function and health-related quality of life in 
patients with psoriatic arthritis: a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase II
trial.

Kavanaugh A(1), Menter A, Mendelsohn A, Shen YK, Lee S, Gottlieb AB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, San Diego, CA, USA.
akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: To use data from a phase II clinical trial to evaluate the effect of
ustekinumab, a human immunoglobulin monoclonal antibody that binds with high
affinity to the shared p40 subunit of human interleukins-12 and -23, on physical 
disability and health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in patients with psoriatic 
arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In this multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
of ustekinumab, patients with active PsA were randomized (1:1 ratio) to receive
either ustekinumab at weeks 0, 1, 2, and 3 and placebo at weeks 12 and 16 (n =
76) or placebo at weeks 0, 1, 2, and 3 and ustekinumab at weeks 12 and 16 (n =
70). Physical function was assessed using the disability index from the Health
Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index (HAQ-DI) in all randomized patients.
HRQoL was evaluated using the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) in a subset
of patients (84.9%) with at least 3% body surface area (BSA) psoriasis
involvement at baseline.
RESULTS: At baseline, overall mean HAQ-DI and DLQI scores were 0.9 and 11.5,
respectively, indicating impaired physical function and moderate effect on HRQoL.
At week 12, ustekinumab patients had significantly more improvement (decrease) in
the mean HAQ-DI (-0.31) and DLQI (-8.6) scores versus placebo (-0.04 and -0.8,
respectively; p < 0.001 for both comparisons). At week 12, 58.7% (37/63) of
ustekinumab-treated patients had a DLQI score of 0 or 1 (no negative effect of
disease or treatment on HRQoL) versus 5.5% (3/55) for placebo (p < 0.001). The
results also indicated a positive but weak correlation between improvement in
physical function and HRQoL, pain, and skin response as well as between
improvement in joint and skin responses in patients receiving ustekinumab or
placebo. Potential limitations of the study include the short duration of the
placebo-controlled period and the relatively small patient population.
CONCLUSION: Ustekinumab significantly improved physical function and HRQoL in
patients with PsA and psoriasis involving at least 3% BSA.

PMID: 20831455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Dec;48(12):830-46.

Population pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab in patients with active psoriatic
arthritis.

Zhu YW(1), Mendelsohn A, Pendley C, Davis HM, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacokinetics, Modeling and Simulation, Biologics Clinical Pharmacology,
Centocor Research & Development, Inc., 200 Great Valley Parkway, Malvern, PA
19355, USA. yzhu8@its.jnj.com

PURPOSE: To characterize the population pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous
ustekinumab, a human IgG1Kappa; monoclonal antibody against interleukin-12/23p40,
using data from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase II study in 
patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: A total of 786 quantifiable serum ustekinumab concentrations from 130
patients were analyzed using a nonlinear mixed-effects modeling approach. A
1-compartment model with first-order absorption and elimination was selected as
the structural model.
RESULTS: The population typical mean (percent relative standard error (%RSE))
values for apparent clearance (CL/F), apparent volume of distribution (V/F), and 
absorption rate constant (ka) obtained from the final covariate model were 0.465 
l × day-1 (5.1%), 14.3 l (4.4%), and 0.427 day-1 (3.9%), respectively. The
between-subject variability in CL/F, V/F, and ka were 53.9%, 42.3%, and 82.4%,
respectively. Patient body weight and antibody-to-ustekinumab status were
significant covariates affecting the CL/F and/or V/F of ustekinumab. None of the 
other factors evaluated, such as age, sex, race, baseline disease
characteristics, concomitant methotrexate or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, and past use of immunosuppressives, biologics, systemic corticosteroids,
or disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs, were found to have significant effects 
on the pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab.
CONCLUSION: The pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab in patients with PsA are
comparable to those in patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis which
was previously investigated.

PMID: 21084039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Rheumatol. 2011 Sep;38(9):2034-8. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110420.

The OMERACT Psoriatic Arthritis Magnetic Resonance Imaging Score (PsAMRIS) is
reliable and sensitive to change: results from an OMERACT workshop.

Bøyesen P(1), McQueen FM, Gandjbakhch F, Lillegraven S, Coates L, Wiell C,
Haavardsholm EA, Conaghan PG, Peterfy CG, Bird P, Ostergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo,Norway.
pernilleboyesen@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this multireader exercise was to assess the reliability and
sensitivity to change of the psoriatic arthritis magnetic resonance imaging score
(PsAMRIS) in PsA patients followed for 1 year.
METHODS: MRI was acquired from 12 patients with PsA before initiation of
treatment and after 12 months. MR images were scored according to PsAMRIS (for
synovitis, tenosynovitis, periarticular inflammation, bone marrow edema, bone
erosion, and bone proliferation) under standardized conditions, in unknown
chronological order. Intraobserver/interobserver reliability was examined by
intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) and sensitivity to change by
standardized response means (SRM).
RESULTS: The interobserver reliability of PsAMRIS was high for synovitis,
tenosynovitis, periarticular inflammation, and bone edema status and change
scores (interobserver ICC 0.87-0.97). The intraobserver reliability was moderate 
to high (ICC 0.60-0.98) for status and change scores, except for change in
periarticular inflammation (ICC 0.33). PsAMRIS sensitivity to change was moderate
for synovitis, tenosynovitis, and periarticular inflammation (SRM 0.5-0.8), while
poor (SRM 0.1-0.3) for bone marrow edema, erosion, and bone proliferation. Rare
occurrence and minimal change contributed to poor SRM and change-score ICC for
bone parameters.
CONCLUSION: This multireader exercise, performed under standardized conditions,
confirmed PsAMRIS to have high interobserver and intraobserver reliability for
hand PsA. Measures of inflammation were sensitive to change, implying that
PsAMRIS may be a valuable tool for monitoring change in inflammation during PsA
clinical trials.

PMID: 21885513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Jun;70(6):1091-4. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.142539. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

Zoledronic acid does not reduce MRI erosive progression in PsA but may suppress
bone oedema: the Zoledronic Acid in Psoriatic Arthritis (ZAPA) Study.

McQueen F(1), Lloyd R, Doyle A, Robinson E, Lobo M, Exeter M, Taylor WJ, Jones P,
Reid IR, Dalbeth N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medical and Health 
Sciences, University of Auckland, 85 Park Rd, Grafton, Auckland, New Zealand.
f.mcqueen@auckland.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: The effect of zoledronic acid (ZA) on articular bone in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) was investigated using MRI.
METHODS: Patients with erosive PsA were randomised to receive 3-monthly infusions
of ZA or placebo for 1 year. An additional 'tests alone' group received no
infusions. Clinical assessments and MRI scans were performed at baseline and 1
year.
RESULTS: Paired 1.5T MRI scans were available in 22 patients including 6 who
received ZA and 16 who did not (non-ZA = 6 placebo + 10 'tests alone' patients). 
The Disease Activity Score (28 swollen and tender joints, C reactive protein fell
over 12 months to a greater degree in patients on ZA than in non-ZA patients
(-1.6 vs -0.3, p=0.023). The MRI bone oedema score decreased in the ZA group
(15.5 to 8.5) but increased in the non-ZA group (14.0 to 18.0) (p= 0.0056) with
regression of bone oedema at 13.5% of sites in ZA patients vs 1.3% in non-ZA
patients (p = 0.0073) and progression in 1.3% of sites in ZA patients vs 6.9% in 
non-ZA patients (p = 0.072). There was no difference between groups in change in 
MRI erosion score.
CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study ZA reduced the progression of MRI bone oedema,
indicating probable suppression of osteitis concordant with reduction in clinical
measures of disease activity.

PMID: 21342915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 1991;118(2):97-105.

[Psoriasis: development and fatal complications].

[Article in French]

Roth PE(1), Grosshans E, Bergoend H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique Dermatologique, Faculté de Médecine, Université Louis-Pasteur,
Strasbourg, France.

In a retrospective study we tried to evaluate the number of severe psoriasis with
a lethal outcome observed in France in a 20-year period from 1965 to 1985. Among 
992 psoriatic in-patients on care during this period in the Dermatology Clinic of
Strasbourg, 7 died of different complications directly related to the skin
disease or its therapy; 39 further cases could be gathered through different
departments of dermatology of France. Patients who died had generalized psoriasis
(13 cases), psoriatic erythroderma (15 cases) and generalized pustular psoriasis 
(18 cases); 18 (39 p. 100) also had psoriatic polyarthritis. Circumstances
leading to death (table I) were metabolic disorders, related to erythroderma in
most cases, non-specific complications (infections, amyloidosis) or complications
of specific treatments (methotrexate, etretinate, corticosteroids,
mechlorethamine). A comprehensive review of the literature over a century showed 
that only 72 lethal psoriasis cases have been reported: this rather low number
may be due to the fact that some rare pathologies, such as visceral amyloidosis
(12 cases) (table III) and fatal complications of methotrexate therapy (38 cases)
(table V), paradoxically are more often published than non-specific complications
occurring in severe psoriasis, such as cardiovascular failure or cachexy in
erythrodermic patients. However, the review of the literature shows, as our own
inquiry, the poor prognosis of generalized pustular forms and of
psoriasis-associated polyarthropathies: among 42 lethal cases where enough data
were available, 23 (55 p. 100) had psoriatic polyarthritis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 2048897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011 Feb;63(2):195-202. doi: 10.1002/acr.20363.

Prevalence of atherosclerotic risk factors and the metabolic syndrome in patients
with chronic inflammatory arthritis.

Mok CC(1), Ko GT, Ho LY, Yu KL, Chan PT, To CH.

Author information: 
(1)Tuen Mun Hospital, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
ccmok2005@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), ankylosing spondylitis (AS), and psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: Consecutive patients with RA, AS, or PsA who attended our outpatient
arthritis clinics between July and November 2009 were recruited for a study of
atherosclerotic risk factors and the metabolic syndrome, defined according to the
2009 joint statements using the Asian criteria for central obesity.
RESULTS: Nine hundred thirty patients were studied (699 with RA, 122 with AS, and
109 with PsA; 70% women, mean±SD age 51.1±12.7 years). The mean±SD disease
duration for patients with RA, AS, and PsA was 5.3±5.4, 6.0±5.6, and 3.6±3.1
years, respectively. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was significantly
higher in PsA (38%) than RA (20%) or AS (11%; P<0.001). The odds ratios (ORs) for
the metabolic syndrome compared to age- and sex-matched controls were 0.98 (95%
confidence interval [95% CI] 0.78-1.23, P=0.88), 0.59 (95% CI 0.30-1.15, P=0.12),
and 2.68 (95% CI 1.60-4.50, P<0.001), respectively, for RA, AS, and PsA. Patients
with PsA had a significantly higher prevalence of impaired fasting glucose (30%; 
P<0.001), low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (33%; P<0.001), high
triglycerides level (21%; P=0.008), central obesity (65%; P<0.001), and high
blood pressure (56%; P=0.045). In a logistic regression model, the adjusted OR
for the metabolic syndrome in PsA was 2.44 (95% CI 1.48-4.01, P<0.001) relative
to RA or AS. The adjusted ORs for central obesity, impaired fasting glucose,
hypertriglyceridemia, and low HDL cholesterol were also significantly higher in
PsA patients.
CONCLUSION: Patients with PsA, but not RA or AS, have a significantly higher
prevalence of the metabolic syndrome compared to the general population. Among
the 3 diseases studied, PsA has the highest prevalence of the metabolic syndrome 
and is associated with the highest cardiovascular risk.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 20890981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Sep;159(3):704-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08727.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Infliximab improves health-related quality of life in the presence of
comorbidities among patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis.

Feldman SR(1), Gottlieb AB, Bala M, Wu Y, Eisenberg D, Guzzo C, Li S, Dooley LT, 
Menter A.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. sfeldman@wfubmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis affects patients both physically and psychologically.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of comorbidities on health-related quality 
of life (HRQoL) and to determine whether infliximab improved HRQoL in the
presence of these conditions.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind study, 835 patients with
moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis were randomized to receive infliximab 3 or 5 
mg kg(-1) or placebo at weeks 0, 2 and 6. Infliximab-treated patients were
re-randomized at week 14 to receive the same treatment every 8 weeks or as needed
through week 46; placebo patients crossed over to infliximab 5 mg kg(-1) at week 
16. Disease severity (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index, PASI) and HRQoL
(Dermatology Life Quality Index, DLQI; 36-item Short-Form Health Survey, SF-36)
were measured at various time points. The effect of patient comorbidities on
baseline HRQoL was assessed using multiple regression models. The impact of key
comorbidities on infliximab treatment effect was also assessed.
RESULTS: Disease severity (PASI), depression and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) were
predictors of poor baseline HRQoL. At week 10, infliximab 3 and 5 mg kg(-1)
significantly improved physical and mental health dimensions of the SF-36 and the
DLQI (all P < 0.001). Consistent improvement in HRQoL with infliximab treatment
was observed regardless of baseline patient characteristics or comorbidities.
Through week 50, HRQoL and PASI scores were most improved with infliximab 5 mg
kg(-1) administered every 8 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Disease severity, depression and PsA were significant predictors of 
poor HRQoL. Infliximab significantly improved HRQoL, regardless of these
characteristics.

PMID: 18627375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Apr;52(4):1227-36.

Sustained benefits of infliximab therapy for dermatologic and articular
manifestations of psoriatic arthritis: results from the infliximab multinational 
psoriatic arthritis controlled trial (IMPACT).

Antoni CE(1), Kavanaugh A, Kirkham B, Tutuncu Z, Burmester GR, Schneider U, Furst
DE, Molitor J, Keystone E, Gladman D, Manger B, Wassenberg S, Weier R, Wallace
DJ, Weisman MH, Kalden JR, Smolen J.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.
christian.antoni@spcorp.com

Erratum in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Sep;52(9):2951.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the efficacy and tolerability of infliximab therapy for
the articular and dermatologic manifestations of active psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: One hundred four patients with PsA in whom prior therapy with at least 1
disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) had failed were recruited into this 
investigator-initiated, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trial. During the initial blinded portion of the study, patients
received infusions of infliximab (5 mg/kg) or placebo at weeks 0, 2, 6, and 14.
After week 16, patients initially assigned to receive placebo crossed over to
receive infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks through week 50, while patients
initially randomized to infliximab continued to receive active treatment at the
same dose through week 50. The primary efficacy outcome was achievement of the
American College of Rheumatology 20% criteria for improvement in rheumatoid
arthritis (ACR20) at week 16. Additional predefined clinical efficacy assessments
included the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score, the ACR50 and ACR70 
criteria, the Disease Activity Score in 28 joints, the Health Assessment
Questionnaire, ratings of enthesitis and dactylitis, and the Psoriatic Arthritis 
Response Criteria score.
RESULTS: The proportion of infliximab-treated patients who achieved an ACR20
response at week 16 (65%) was significantly higher than the proportion of
placebo-treated patients who achieved this response (10%). In addition, 46% of
infliximab-treated patients achieved an ACR50 response, and 29% achieved an ACR70
response; no placebo-treated patient achieved these end points. Among patients
who had PASI scores of >/=2.5 at baseline, 68% of infliximab-treated patients
achieved improvement of >/=75% in the PASI score at week 16 compared with none of
the placebo-treated patients. Continued therapy with infliximab resulted in
sustained improvement in articular and dermatologic manifestations of PsA through
week 50. The incidence of adverse events was similar between the treatment
groups.
CONCLUSION: Therapy with infliximab at a dose of 5 mg/kg significantly improved
the signs and symptoms of arthritis, psoriasis, dactylitis, and enthesitis in
patients with active PsA that had been resistant to DMARD therapy. With continued
infliximab treatment, benefits were sustained through 50 weeks. The
benefit-to-risk ratio appeared favorable in this study population.

PMID: 15818699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Dermatolog Treat. 2006;17(6):355-8.

High-dose initiation of etanercept in psoriatic arthritis and plaque psoriasis:
efficacy, safety and impact on patients' quality of life.

De Felice C(1), Mazzotta A, Esposito M, Bianchi L, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
catiadefelice@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Etanercept is a human recombinant protein that functions as a
competitive inhibitor of tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), a
pro-inflammatory molecule exerting a key role in the pathogenesis of psoriatic
arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Seventy-one patients affected by PsA with variable skin involvement,
refractory to conventional anti-rheumatic drugs, were treated with 50 mg
etanercept subcutaneous injections twice-weekly for 12 weeks, followed by a
maintenance dose regimen of 25 mg twice-weekly for an additional 12 weeks.
Efficacy and safety were assessed at 12-24 weeks. Efficacy criteria was the
global assessment of a patient's joint symptoms expressed by the Ritchie index
(RI), while skin symptoms were assessed by the psoriasis area and severity index 
(PASI). The impact of etanercept on patients' quality of life (QoL) was measured 
by four validated QoL instruments.
RESULTS: At week 12, all patients showed a reduction of symptoms with improvement
of mean RI (mRI) of 66.1% from baseline and a reduction of mean PASI (mPASI) from
8.8 to 3.2. At week 24, there was a mRI reduction of 78.4% as well as a mPASI
reduction to 1.7. Psoriasis-specific QoL measures improved throughout therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: A high-dose regimen of etanercept is a highly effective and
tolerable treatment for PsA with variable skin involvement, although a larger
study population group and a longer trial would be needed to draw strong
conclusions about the safety of the higher dose.

PMID: 17853309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biologicals. 2010 Sep;38(5):567-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2010.05.003. Epub
2010 Jul 16.

Effects of anti-TNF therapy on glucose metabolism in patients with ankylosing
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis or juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

da Silva BS(1), Bonfá E, de Moraes JC, Saad CG, Ribeiro AC, Gonçalves CR, de
Carvalho JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, City University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of anti-tumor necrosis 
factor (anti-TNF) in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), ankylosing spondylitis 
(AS) or psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Sixty-two patients were investigated: 7 JIA;
37 AS; and 18 PsA. Caucasian race accounted for 79% and 29% were female. Mean age
was 40.4 +/- 12.6 years. None of the patients had a history of diabetes, and none
had used oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin. Treatment was with adalimumab,
infliximab and etanercept. Glucose, inflammatory markers and prednisone dose were
assessed at baseline, as well as after three and six months of treatment. The
mean erythrocyte sedimentation rate was significantly lower at three months and
six months than at baseline (13.7 +/- 18.0 and 18 +/- 22.5 vs. 27.9 +/- 23.4 mm; 
p = 0.001). At baseline, three months and six months, we found the following:
mean C-reactive protein levels were comparable (22.1 +/- 22.7, 14.5 +/- 30.7 and 
16.0 +/- 23.8 mg/L, respectively; p = 0.26); mean glucose levels remained
unchanged (90.8 +/- 22.2 mg/dl, 89.5 +/- 14.6 mg/dl and 89.8 +/- 13.6 mg/dl,
respectively; p = 0.91); and mean prednisone doses were low and stable (3.9 +/-
4.9 mg/day, 3.7 +/- 4.8 mg/day and 2.6 +/- 4.0 mg/day, respectively; p = 0.23).
During the first six months of treatment, anti-TNF therapy does not seem to
influence glucose metabolism in JIA, AS or PsA.

Copyright 2010 The International Association for Biologicals. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20638299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Clin Rheumatol. 2011 Aug;30(8):1063-7. doi: 10.1007/s10067-011-1680-y. Epub 2011 
Mar 1.

The effectiveness and safety of TNF-alpha blockers in the treatment of early
psoriatic arthritis: an Italian multicentre longitudinal observational pilot
study.

Scarpa R(1), Atteno M, Lubrano E, Provenzano G, D'Angelo S, Spadaro A, Costa L,
Olivieri I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Rheumatology Research Unit, 
Early Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic, University Federico II, via Sergio Pansini no. 
5, Naples, Italy. rscarpa@unina.it

Comment in
    Orthopade. 2013 Feb;42(2):124.

The objective of this study is to assess the effectiveness and safety of TNF-α
blockers in a group of early psoriatic arthritis (PsA) patients with an
unsatisfactory response to previous conventional treatment consecutively enrolled
in five Italian centres. A 24-week open-label trial was carried out in
consecutive early PsA patients classified according to the CASPAR criteria, with 
unsatisfactory response to previous treatments and with a DAS28 threshold as
≥3.2, seen at the outpatient clinics of each centre. Exclusion criteria were
previous usage of TNF-α blockers and a disease duration >12 months. The choice of
any of the three TNF-α blockers was decided by the expert's opinion, without any 
restriction. Effectiveness was considered as an improvement of DAS28 at 12 and 24
weeks of treatment. Secondary endpoints were an improvement of TJC, SWJ, HAQ
score and PASI score. Changes from baseline to the 12- and 24-week follow-up
assessments were analysed using the Wilcoxon paired sign rank test. Twenty-nine
patients (14 males, 15 females, median age 37 years, range 20-65 years) were
enrolled. A statistical improvement of the DAS28 was observed at 12 and 24 weeks 
from baseline (p<0.001). Secondary endpoints also confirmed the effectiveness of 
the TNF-α blockers in the treatment of early PsA. No severe adverse events were
observed during the treatment period, and no patient withdrew from the
medications. This study suggests that the TNF-α blockers can be effective in the 
management of early PsA. Further controlled studies will provide more data on
this challenging topic.

PMCID: PMC3145085
PMID: 21360007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Clin Rheumatol. 1988 Sep;7(3):372-7.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with sulphasalazine: a one year open study.

Farr M(1), Kitas GD, Waterhouse L, Jubb R, Felix-Davies D, Bacon PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University of Birmingham, Medical School, UK.

Sulphasalazine (SASP) has recently become established as an effective treatment
for active rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but has not previously been used in
psoriatic arthritis in which remission-inducing drugs have proved disappointing. 
In this one year open study, 34 patients with active psoriatic arthritis were
treated with sulphasalazine. An overall favourable clinical response was observed
in 23 patients (67%). Nine patients (26%) achieved a very good therapeutic
response and these either had arthritis associated with spondylitis or the
symmetrical type of joint disease. Evaluation at 3, 6 and 12 months showed a
significant improvement in inflammatory indices including a reduction in the
C-reactive protein level and ESR. The drug was well-tolerated and side-effects
were mild. Eight patients (23.5%) stopped the drug because of reactions and one
patient with a rash was successfully desensitised. Fifty-three percent continued 
the drug into the second year. No apparent exacerbation of the psoriasis was
observed. These results suggest that sulphasalazine is a safe and potentially
effective drug in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis. A double-blind
placebo-controlled trial has been set up to determine its true efficacy.

PMID: 2906579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Rheumatol. 2011 Sep;38(9):2077-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.101256.

Minimal important difference and responsiveness to change of the SF-36 in
patients with psoriatic arthritis receiving tumor necrosis factor-α blockers.

Leung YY, Zhu TY, Tam LS, Kun EW, Li EK.

PMID: 21885524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Aug;69(8):1441-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.122259. Epub 2010 Jun
4.

Application of the DAREA/DAPSA score for assessment of disease activity in
psoriatic arthritis.

Schoels M(1), Aletaha D, Funovits J, Kavanaugh A, Baker D, Smolen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Medicine, Hietzing Hospital, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Instruments for measuring disease activity in
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are not yet firmly established, and most of the
currently employed ones have been derived for rheumatoid arthritis. Some of these
instruments are based on 28 joint counts, which do not capture joints frequently 
affected in PsA. Therefore, the reliability and validity of DAREA (for 'Disease
Activity index for REactive Arthritis'), which was originally developed for
reactive arthritis and employs a 66/68 joint count, was tested in patients with
PsA.
METHODS: Trial data from the Infliximab Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis
Controlled Trial were analysed. Results were then independently validated using
an observational data set. DAREA was compared to other composite indices
regarding correlations with core set variables, sensitivity to change and
criterion validity.
RESULTS: Good correlation of the DAREA with single items of disease activity,
other composite scores (r=0.6-0.9) and physical function (Health Assessment
Questionnaire; r=0.5) was found. Likewise, DAREA was at least as sensitive to
change as the other indices and more so in patients with distal interphalangeal
joint involvement. Additionally, DAREA correlated well with radiographic changes.
CONCLUSION: The analyses of this study provide evidence of the utility and
validity of the DAREA for PsA disease activity assessment. A second name should
therefore be assigned to this score: DAPSA (for 'Disease Activity index for
PSoriatic Arthritis').

PMID: 20525844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Rheumatol. 1984 Mar;3 Suppl 1:67-74.

Longterm experience with oral gold in rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic
arthritis.

Dequeker J, Verdickt W, Gevers G, Vanschoubroek K.

Oral gold (auranofin) has been used in 31 patients, 20 with active rheumatoid
arthritis and 11 with active psoriatic arthritis. In rheumatoid arthritis the
oral gold treatment was compared to parenteral gold treatment in a patient blind 
trial for two years. The psoriatic arthritis cases were incorporated in an open
trial. Auranofin 6 mg once daily reduced significantly the activity in rheumatoid
arthritis and in psoriatic arthritis. The beneficial effect obtained with
auranofin at a dose of 6 mg/day during the first year of treatment could not be
maintained by 3 mg/day in the second year. Auranofin compared to parenteral gold 
had a distinct advantage of better systemic tolerability, although parenteral
gold was found to be more potent. There was no greater risk for toxic skin
reaction to oral gold in psoriatic arthritis than in rheumatoid arthritis. The
overall conclusion of this longterm study is that oral gold (auranofin) 6 mg once
daily, although slightly less effective than parenteral gold, can be considered
to be the first choice of gold treatment for rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic
arthritis, because the compliance, which is a reflection of a combination of
tolerance and efficacy, for oral gold therapy was, in our hands, undoubtedly
superior to parenteral gold.

PMID: 6432416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Arch Dermatol. 1990 Mar;126(3):351-5.

Psoriasis induced at the injection site of recombinant interferon gamma. Results 
of immunohistologic investigations.

Fierlbeck G(1), Rassner G, Müller C.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Division, University of Tübingen, West Germany.

Comment in
    Arch Dermatol. 1990 Nov;126(11):1515-6.

Recombinant human interferon gamma used for treatment of psoriatic arthritis was 
found to induce expression of HLA-DR, but not HLA-DP or HLA-DQ, on keratinocytes 
at the site of injection. Some patients showed an improvement of their joint
symptoms, but the cutaneous manifestations remained unaffected. In 10 of 42
patients, punctiform psoriatic foci could be induced at the site of injection of 
interferon gamma. For this presentation, we selected a female patient with
psoriatic arthropathy and type II diabetes mellitus in whom psoriasis was induced
at the site of application of interferon gamma, but not after subcutaneous
injection of insulin or placebo. We conclude that interferon gamma is an
important lymphokine in the development of psoriasis.

PMID: 2106838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Mar;158(3):549-57. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Impact of adalimumab treatment on health-related quality of life and other
patient-reported outcomes: results from a 16-week randomized controlled trial in 
patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis.

Revicki D(1), Willian MK, Saurat JH, Papp KA, Ortonne JP, Sexton C, Camez A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Health Outcomes Research, United BioSource Corporation, Bethesda,
MD 20814, USA. dennis.revicki@unitedbiosource.com

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2008 Mar;158(3):435-6.

BACKGROUND: Health-related quality of life (HRQOL) and other patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) are important in evaluating the impact of psoriasis and its
treatment.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the impact of adalimumab treatment on HRQOL and other PROs 
in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis.
METHODS: A 16-week, double-blind, double-dummy, randomized controlled trial
evaluated the efficacy and safety of adalimumab in 271 adults with moderate to
severe chronic plaque psoriasis. Patients were randomized in a 2:2:1 ratio to
adalimumab, methotrexate (MTX) or placebo. PROs were evaluated throughout the
study and included the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI), Patient's Global
Assessment of disease severity, plaque psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis pain
visual analogue scale (VAS), Psoriasis-Related Pruritus Assessment and EuroQOL 5D
(EQ-5D).
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences were observed between the
adalimumab- and placebo-treated and the MTX-treated groups on mean DLQI total
scores during the 16-week double-blind study (both P<0.001). Significant
differences, favouring adalimumab compared with placebo, were also observed on
the Patient's Global Assessment of disease severity (P<0.001), VAS for pain
(P<0.001), Psoriasis-Related Pruritus Assessment (P<0.001), EQ-5D VAS (P<0.001)
and EQ-5D index score (P<0.01). Compared with MTX, adalimumab resulted in
statistically significantly greater improvements in the Patient's Global
Assessment of disease severity (P<0.001), the VAS for pain (P<0.01) and the
Psoriasis-Related Pruritus Assessment (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab was efficacious in improving dermatology-specific HRQOL, 
disease control and symptom outcomes in patients with moderate to severe
psoriasis.

PMID: 18047521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Br J Dermatol. 2006 Jul;155(1):156-9.

Treatment of erythrodermic psoriasis with etanercept.

Esposito M(1), Mazzotta A, de Felice C, Papoutsaki M, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Viale Oxford 81,
00133 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Severe variants of psoriasis, such as erythrodermic psoriasis, may be
associated with serious morbidity and mortality. Current treatment options for
erythrodermic psoriasis are limited, unsatisfactory and potentially associated
with organ-specific toxicity. Recently, a new class of agents, targeted
biological therapies, has emerged. Etanercept is a recombinant human fusion
protein acting as a competitive inhibitor of tumour necrosis factor-alpha. The
safety and efficacy of etanercept have been widely demonstrated in psoriatic
arthritis and moderate to severe plaque-type psoriasis.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and tolerability of etanercept in the
treatment of erythrodermic psoriasis over a period of 24 weeks.
METHODS: Ten patients, eight men and two women, were selected to receive
etanercept 25 mg subcutaneously twice weekly. The Psoriasis Area and Severity
Index (PASI) score, ranging from 0 to 72, was used to assess the severity of
disease.
RESULTS: Etanercept was well tolerated and led to a significant reduction in the 
severity of disease over the period of treatment. After 24 weeks, the mean PASI
score decreased from 39.1 (baseline) to 5.1. At week 12, five of 10 (50%)
patients achieved an improvement of PASI score from baseline exceeding 75%. At
week 24, six of 10 patients (60%) achieved or maintained an improvement of PASI
score from baseline exceeding 75% while two patients (20%) maintained an
improvement of between 50% and 75%.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, etanercept has been demonstrated to be an effective
treatment for erythrodermic psoriasis, providing a safe and convenient
alternative to current therapies.

PMID: 16792768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011 Jan 27;13(1):R7. doi: 10.1186/ar3228.

Change in CD3 positive T-cell expression in psoriatic arthritis synovium
correlates with change in DAS28 and magnetic resonance imaging synovitis scores
following initiation of biologic therapy--a single centre, open-label study.

Pontifex EK(1), Gerlag DM, Gogarty M, Vinkenoog M, Gibbs A, Burgman I, Fearon U, 
Bresnihan B, Tak PP, Gibney RG, Veale DJ, FitzGerald O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, St. Vincents University Hospital, Elm Park, Dublin
4, Ireland. elizapontifex@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: With the development of increasing numbers of potential therapeutic
agents in inflammatory disease comes the need for effective biomarkers to help
screen for drug efficacy and optimal dosing regimens early in the clinical trial 
process. This need has been recognized by the Outcome Measures in Rheumatology
Clinical Trials (OMERACT) group, which has established guidelines for biomarker
validation. To seek a candidate synovial biomarker of treatment response in
psoriatic arthritis (PsA), we determined whether changes in immunohistochemical
markers of synovial inflammation correlate with changes in disease activity
scores assessing 28 joints (ΔDAS28) or magnetic resonance imaging synovitis
scores (ΔMRI) in patients with PsA treated with a biologic agent.
METHODS: Twenty-five consecutive patients with PsA underwent arthroscopic
synovial biopsies and MRI scans of an inflamed knee joint at baseline and 12
weeks after starting treatment with either anakinra (first 10 patients) or
etanercept (subsequent 15 patients) in two sequential studies of identical
design. DAS28 scores were measured at both time points. Immunohistochemical
staining for CD3, CD68 and Factor VIII (FVIII) was performed on synovial samples 
and scored by digital image analysis (DIA). MRI scans performed at baseline and
at 12 weeks were scored for synovitis semi-quantitatively. The ΔDAS28 of the
European League Against Rheumatism good response definition (>1.2) was chosen to 
divide patients into responder and non-responder groups. Differences between
groups (Mann Whitney U test) and correlations between ΔDAS28 with change in
immunohistochemical and MRI synovitis scores (Spearman's rho test) were
calculated.
RESULTS: Paired synovial samples and MRI scans were available for 21 patients (8 
anakinra, 13 etanercept) and 23 patients (8 anakinra, 15 etanercept)
respectively. Change in CD3 (ΔCD3) and CD68 expression in the synovial sublining 
layer (ΔCD68sl) was significantly greater in the disease responders compared to
non-responders following treatment (P = 0.005 and 0.013 respectively). ΔCD3, but 
not ΔCD68 or ΔFVIII, correlated with both ΔDAS28 (r = 0.49, P = 0.025) and ΔMRI
(r = 0.58, P = 0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The correlation of ΔCD3 with ΔDAS28 and ΔMRI following biologic
treatment in this cohort contributes to the validation of ΔCD3 as a synovial
biomarker of disease response in PsA, and supports the further evaluation of ΔCD3
for predictive properties of future clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3241351
PMID: 21272347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Apr;130(4):447-51.

Zidovudine improves psoriasis in human immunodeficiency virus-positive males.

Duvic M(1), Crane MM, Conant M, Mahoney SE, Reveille JD, Lehrman SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Texas Medical School, Houston.

BACKGROUND AND DESIGN: Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
can develop severe psoriasis, which is difficult to treat using conventional
therapy. Anecdotal case reports have suggested that administration of zidovudine 
can improve psoriasis in the HIV-infected patient. An open-label study was
conducted to determine the safety and effectiveness of zidovudine therapy in 24
patients with HIV-associated psoriasis and to correlate response with laboratory 
and clinical variables.
RESULTS: Of 19 evaluable patients, 90% had either partial (58%) or complete (32%)
improvement of their HIV-associated psoriasis during zidovudine therapy. Greater 
than 75% reduction in the body surface area involved was positively associated
with antigenemia and an age younger than 30 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Zidovudine therapy, at a dosage of 1200 mg/d, appears to be
beneficial in the treatment of HIV-associated psoriasis, although long-term
relapses occurred and the associated arthritis did not improve.

PMID: 7909423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Arthritis Rheum. 1976 Jan-Feb;19(1):21-8.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with azaribine.

Levine S, Paulus HE.

Thirty-two patients with psoriatic arthritis unresponsive to conventional therapy
were treated wtih the antipyrimidine azaribine. For the group, improvement was
highly significant (P less than 0.01) when average painful joint count, ring
size, grip strength, pain, and morning gel were compared with baseline
measurements. The spectrum of response of individual patients varied from total
remission or arthritis in 5 patients to no improvement in 7. Dermatitis improved 
more than 50% in 26 patients. Reduction in hematocrit, gastrointestinal
irritation, and occasional central nervous system toxicity were readily reversed 
by decreasing or discontinuing dosage. Azaribine appears to be a useful agent for
trial in the treatment of refractory psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 766762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2011 Aug;25(4):511-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1472-8206.2010.00872.x. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Changes in arterial stiffness during continued infliximab treatment in patients
with inflammatory arthropathies.

Angel K(1), Provan SA, Hammer HB, Mowinckel P, Kvien TK, Atar D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital Aker, 0514 Oslo, Norway.
kristin.angel@medisin.uio.no

Chronic inflammatory arthropathies such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), ankylosing 
spondylitis (AS), and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are associated with an increased 
risk of cardiovascular disease. TNF-α antagonists may improve vascular function
in these patients and thus be beneficial with regard to cardiovascular disease.
This study evaluated arterial stiffness and disease activity between two
infusions with a TNF-α antagonist (infliximab) in patients with inflammatory
arthropathies on long-term infliximab therapy. Augmentation index (AIx), aortic
pulse wave velocity (aPWV), and disease activity were measured in 17 patients
with RA, AS, or PsA who had been treated with infliximab for at least 12 months. 
The patients were examined immediately before their infliximab infusion and
thereafter every 10th day until their next infusion scheduled at week 4-8. AIx
and aPWV did not change during the period between two infliximab infusions. The
patients had a temporary improvement in the general disease activity assessed on 
visual analogue scales by the patients (P = 0.04) and the investigator (P = 0.02)
after the infusion. In the group of patients with RA, the Disease Activity Score 
(DAS28) changed significantly in a similar manner (P = 0.003). C-reactive protein
and erythrocyte sedimentation rate remained unchanged. Infliximab infusions did
not alter aortic pulse wave velocity or augmentation index in patients with
inflammatory arthropathies who were on long-term infliximab therapy. Reductions
in the general disease activity and DAS28 were not reflected in alterations of
aortic stiffness or augmentation index.

© 2010 The Authors Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology © 2010 Société Française
de Pharmacologie et de Thérapeutique.

PMID: 20825487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Arthritis Rheum. 1989 Feb;32(2):158-65.

A double-blind placebo-controlled study of auranofin in patients with psoriatic
arthritis.

Carette S(1), Calin A, McCafferty JP, Wallin BA.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, Sainte Foy, Quebec, Canada.

Two hundred thirty-eight patients with psoriatic arthritis were entered into a
6-month, multicenter, double-blind trial comparing auranofin and placebo.
Polyarthritis (greater than 5 tender joints) was present in 90% of the patients, 
and 94% were seronegative. Auranofin treatment was statistically superior to
placebo treatment, according to physician's global assessment and functional
scores. A trend in favor of auranofin treatment was seen for each of the other
disease parameters studied. Psoriasis worsened in 6 auranofin-treated patients
and in 3 placebo-treated patients. The incidence and nature of other side effects
were similar to those observed in similar trials of patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. Our observations suggest that the use of auranofin in the treatment of
psoriatic arthritis is safe, although its therapeutic advantage over treatment
with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs alone is modest.

PMID: 2645874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Arzneimittelforschung. 1980;30(8A):1440-4.

[Controlled double blind study on the effectiveness and adverse effects of
acemetacin and indomethacin in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in German]

Lonauer G, Wirth W.

In a controlled double blind study the therapeutic efficacy and tolerability of
[1-(p-chlorobenzoyl)-5-methoxy-2-methylindole-3-acetoxyl]-acetic acid
(acemetacin, TV 1322, Rantudil¿) and indometacin were tested in 40 patients (15
male, 25 female) suffering from psoriatic arthritis in which, in a period of
three weeks, the patients received 180 mg acemetacin or 150 mg indometacin daily 
in form of three equally divided doses. In comparison with the initial values the
acemetacin group in all three parameters tested, i.e., "pain, "limitation of
function", "other signs of inflammation", showed a significant trend of
improvement, while in the indometacin group only pain and inflammation could be
improved significantly. With regard to the therapeutic ratios no difference could
be established statistically between both groups. In the indometacin group side
effects were observed nearly 4 times more frequently than in the acemetacin
group; this difference is statistically significant (p < 0.1%). During the
therapy with indometacin two withdrawals were necessary (1 because of
inefficiency and 1 because of gastric complaints). In the acemetacin group there 
were no withdrawals. In 55% of all cases the therapeutic efficacy of acemetacin
was judged as "good", in contrast to only 30% of the cases in the indometacin
group. Acemetacin with regard to efficacy and tolerability seems to be clearly
superior to indometacin.

PMID: 7191313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Arthritis Rheum. 1978 Jun;21(5):513-5.

Chrysotherapy in psoriatic arthritis. Efficacy and toxicity compared to
rheumatoid arthritis.

Dorwart BB, Gall EP, Schumacher HR, Krauser RE.

Chrysotherapy was given to 14 patients with refractory psoriatic polyarthritis
and to a comparable group of 42 patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The psoriatic
patients had a higher rate of remission on gold and less severe toxicity than the
rheumatoid arthritis patients. Psoriatic skin lesions were not affected by
chrysotherapy.

PMID: 96841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Rheumatol. 1987 Aug;14(4):777-9.

Psoriatic arthritis treated with oral colchicine.

Seideman P(1), Fjellner B, Johannesson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

We investigated the use of colchicine in psoriatic arthritis to determine if we
could confirm the good results obtained in an earlier, uncontrolled study. Twelve
of 15 patients with psoriatic skin lesions and arthritis completed a 16-week
placebo controlled double blind crossover study. A significant improvement was
noted in grip strength, Ritchie's index, joint size, joint pain and overall
therapeutic assessment. Psoriatic skin lesions were not improved by colchicine.
The few side effects observed were related to gastrointestinal intolerance, which
were usually controlled by temporarily reducing the dose of the drug. Our results
indicate that 1.5 mg colchicine daily is an effective treatment for psoriatic
arthritis.

PMID: 3668983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Br J Dermatol. 1995 Sep;133(3):426-32.

Inhibition of the metabolism of endogenous retinoic acid as treatment for severe 
psoriasis: an open study with oral liarozole.

Dockx P(1), Decree J, Degreef H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.

Retinoids derived from retinol or beta-carotene are inactivated, among other
ways, by enzymes belonging to the P450 cytochrome group. Liarozole, an
imidazole-containing compound, is known to be a potent inhibitor of the
cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism of all-trans retinoic acid. As a result,
increased levels of this retinoid are found in skin and plasma. Therefore, in the
treatment of psoriasis, therapeutic effects may be expected with liarozole which 
are similar to those observed with synthetic retinoids. In an open study, oral
liarozole was given at a daily dose of 75 mg b.i.d., for 12 weeks to 31 patients 
with severe psoriasis. After 1 month, this dosage could be increased to 150 mg
b.i.d. if there was no improvement or only moderate improvement. Initially, the
effect of liarozole was mainly on scaling. A decrease in the Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index (PASI) score of 45% at week 4, of 69% at week 8 and of 77% at week
12 was obtained, compared with baseline. A further decrease in the PASI score of 
up to 87% was observed in the 16 patients who were allowed to continue treatment 
for a maximum period of 12 months. An excellent or good improvement was noted in 
77% of the patients within 12 weeks of starting treatment. This response rate had
increased to 88% by the last follow-up visit. Nearly all patients (29 of 31)
experienced adverse reactions, such as dry oral mucosa, headache and itching.
These were mostly mild and transient, but four patients dropped out of the study 
because of an adverse event. Haematological, biochemical and cardiovascular
parameters were not significantly influenced by liarozole. Six patients showed an
increase in triglycerides, which normalized in three of four patients during
further treatment. The results of this pilot study suggest that, at doses of
75-150 mg b.i.d., liarozole is an active antipsoriatic drug, and may be a useful 
addition to the existing therapeutic armamentarium. Controlled studies should be 
performed to compare liarozole with standard oral treatments.

PMID: 8546999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Clin Rheumatol. 2010 Apr;29(4):399-403. doi: 10.1007/s10067-009-1340-7.

Comparison of effectiveness and safety of infliximab, etanercept, and adalimumab 
in psoriatic arthritis patients who experienced an inadequate response to
previous disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.

Atteno M(1), Peluso R, Costa L, Padula S, Iervolino S, Caso F, Sanduzzi A,
Lubrano E, Del Puente A, Scarpa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Early Psoriatic Arthritis
Clinic, University Federico II, Naples, Italy.

The aim of this study is to compare effectiveness and safety of Infliximab (INF),
Etanercept (ETN), and Adalimumab (ADA) in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA)
with inadequate response to a previous disease-modifying antirheumatic drug
(DMARD). One hundred consecutive PsA patients with inadequate response to a
previous DMARD entered this study. Clinical and laboratory assessment at baseline
(T0) and 12 (T12) months were performed and included physical examination, vital 
signs, global Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI; extension of psoriasis),
tender joints count (TJC), swollen joint count, health assessment questionnaire
(HAQ; questionnaire for measuring disability), and monitoring of adverse events
(AEs). After enrollment, all patients were randomly given INF 5 mg/Kg every 6-8
weeks, ETN 50 mg weekly, or ADA 40 mg every other week. Baseline therapy with
DMARD remained unchanged. Effectiveness was defined as percentage of ACR20
responders and as clinical remission and/or minimal disease activity at 12 months
treatment. INF, ETN, and ADA all effectively controlled signs and symptoms of
PsA. All variables tested showed at T12 for each treatment a significant
variation from the baseline value. In particular, patients on INF and ADA showed 
the greatest improvement in terms of PASI, while patients on ETN showed the
greatest improvement on TJC and HAQ. ACR response rates were 72% of patients on
ETN, 70% of those on ADA, and 75% of those patients on INF. Occurrence of AEs was
reported in 15% of the cases. Only two AEs in patients on INF were considered
drug related, pneumonitis and thrombocytopenia, respectively. All tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha blockers significantly controlled signs and symptoms of PsA. An
increased knowledge of the different profiles of these agents may help in
optimizing their use.

PMID: 20066450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Mar-Apr;28(2):147-52. Epub 2010 May 13.

Ultrasound imaging for the rheumatologist XXVI. Sonographic assessment of the
knee in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Delle Sedie A(1), Riente L, Filippucci E, Scirè CA, Iagnocco A, Gutierrez M,
Valesini G, Montecucco C, Grassi W, Bombardieri S.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Reumatologia, Università di Pisa, Italy. adellese@lycos.com

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an arthropathy associated to psoriasis, which is
part of the spondyloarthropathy family, and which may present with various forms,
from mono-oligoarthritis to symmetric polyarthritis mimicking rheumatoid
arthritis. In longstanding disease, the symmetric polyarthritis is the most
common pattern of PsA, involving small joint of hands, feet, wrists, ankles and, 
very frequently, knees. Other common features are represented by the inflammation
of enthesis and tendons. Ultrasound (US) examinations were performed using a
Logiq 9 (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) equipped with a
multifrequency linear probe, working at 10-14 MHz. One-hundred and sixty-six knee
joints were investigated in a total of 83 patients. Prior to US assessment, all
patients underwent a clinical examination by an expert rheumatologist who
recorded the presence/absence of pain, tenderness (detected by palpation and/or
active or passive mobilisation of the knee), and knee swelling. Sixty-two (74.7%)
knee joints were found clinically involved, while at least one US finding
indicative of joint inflammation was obtained in 70 (84.3%) knee joints. In the
59% of the patients we noticed synovial hypertrophy. Enthesitis was present in
39.7% of the subjects studied. This study demonstrated that US detected a higher 
number of inflamed knee joints and enthesis with respect to clinical assessment
in PsA patients.

PMID: 20483039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 May;68(5):702-9. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.092767. Epub 2008 Aug 
6.

Adalimumab for long-term treatment of psoriatic arthritis: 2-year data from the
Adalimumab Effectiveness in Psoriatic Arthritis Trial (ADEPT).

Mease PJ(1), Ory P, Sharp JT, Ritchlin CT, Van den Bosch F, Wellborne F, Birbara 
C, Thomson GT, Perdok RJ, Medich J, Wong RL, Gladman DD.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the long-term effectiveness and tolerability of adalimumab
in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients with PsA who completed a 24-week, double-blind study of
adalimumab versus placebo were eligible to enroll in an open-label extension
study and receive adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneously every other week for up to an
additional 120 weeks. At the time of this analysis, available efficacy
evaluations throughout 2 years of treatment (n = 245) included American College
of Rheumatology (ACR) 20%, 50% and 70% improvement scores, measures of joint
disease and skin disease, disability and quality of life; modified total Sharp
scores (mTSS) were available for 2.75 years of treatment for patients who
received adalimumab in the 24-week study.
RESULTS: After 24 weeks of double-blind treatment, the mean change in mTSS was
-0.2 for the adalimumab group (N = 144) and 1.0 for the placebo group (N = 152;
p<0.001), and outcomes for all individual ACR component variables were
significantly improved in adalimumab compared with placebo-treated patients.
Compared with 24-week responses, inhibition of radiographic progression and
improvements in joint disease were maintained in most patients during long-term, 
open-label adalimumab treatment. Also, improvements in skin disease were
maintained, with >20% of patients achieving the strict criterion of psoriasis
area and severity index 100. The nature and frequency of adverse events during
long-term adalimumab treatment were consistent with the safety profile during
short-term treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical and radiographic efficacy of adalimumab demonstrated
during short-term treatment was sustained during long-term treatment. Adalimumab 
has a favourable risk-benefit profile in patients with PsA.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00195689.

PMCID: PMC2663711
PMID: 18684743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Arthritis Rheum. 1984 Apr;27(4):376-81.

Randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled trial of low-dose pulse methotrexate
in psoriatic arthritis.

Willkens RF, Williams HJ, Ward JR, Egger MJ, Reading JC, Clements PJ, Cathcart
ES, Samuelson CO Jr, Solsky MA, Kaplan SB, et al.

Thirty-seven patients with psoriatic arthritis were entered into a 12-week
prospective, controlled, double-blind multicenter trial comparing placebo and
oral pulse methotrexate therapy. Methotrexate was given in a dose of 2.5-5.0 mg
every 12 hours in 3 consecutive doses per week. A stable background medication
program with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs was allowed. Methotrexate was
superior to placebo only in physician assessment of arthritis activity and in
improvement of the amount of skin surface area with psoriasis. A small but
statistically significant rise of serum total bilirubin occurred in the
methotrexate-treated patients. No patients were withdrawn from the study for
adverse drug effects.

PMID: 6712754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dermatol Online J. 2005 Mar 1;11(1):31.

Clinical and histopathological improvement of psoriasis with oral chondroitin
sulfate: a serendipitous finding.

Vergés J(1), Montell E, Herrero M, Perna C, Cuevas J, Pérez M, Möller I.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Scientific Medical Department, Bioibérica, S.A.,
Barcelona, Spain. jverges@bioiberica.com

We describe the clinical and histopathological results of plaque psoriasis in
eleven adult patients with knee osteoarthritis and long-standing, moderate to
severe psoriasis resistant to conventional therapy treated with chondroitin
sulfate. Patients received 800 mg per day of chondroitin sulfate for 2 months.
Skin biopsies were obtained before and after treatment. All patients but one
presented a dramatic improvement of the condition of the skin, with a reduction
of swelling, redness, flaking, and itching (clearance of psoriasis in one
patient), increase in the hydration and softening of the skin, and amelioration
of scaling. Histopathologically, there was a statistically significant decrease
in epidermal thickness, a decrease in the thickness between the stratum basale
and the stratum granulosum, a significant improvement of the degree of psoriasis 
activity, and a decrease in the number of keratinocytes stained with Ki-67. The
confirmation of these serendipitous findings in controlled prospective studies
could represent an important advance in the therapeutic armamentarium for
patients with psoriasis given the excellent safety profile of chondroitin
sulfate.

PMID: 15748570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2010 Jul;62(7):965-9. doi: 10.1002/acr.20155.

Validation of minimal disease activity criteria for psoriatic arthritis using
interventional trial data.

Coates LC(1), Helliwell PS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leeds and Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: New criteria for minimal disease activity (MDA) in psoriatic arthritis
(PsA) have been developed. The aim is to provide further validation of these
criteria using data obtained in interventional trials with infliximab, a drug
with proven efficacy in PsA.
METHODS: The data were obtained from patients in phase II and III infliximab
studies of PsA. In both studies, patients with active PsA were treated with
infliximab (5 mg/kg) or placebo followed by a period of treatment with
infliximab. Between-group comparisons in terms of those achieving MDA and the
relationship of MDA to American College of Rheumatology outcomes, C-reactive
protein levels, and radiologic progression were performed.
RESULTS: In the Infliximab Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis Controlled Trial,
48% (15 of 31) of infliximab-treated patients achieved MDA at week 16, compared
with 3% (1 of 32) taking placebo (P < 0.0001). At week 50, 96% of those patients 
who achieved MDA showed no progression of radiologic disease (increase in the
modified Sharp/van der Heijde score of < or = 0), compared with 67% of those who 
did not achieve MDA (P = 0.012). In the Induction and Maintenance Psoriatic
Arthritis Clinical Trial 2, 52% (40 of 77) of infliximab-treated patients
achieved MDA at week 24, compared with 21% (17 of 80) receiving placebo (P <
0.001). At week 54, 78% of those patients who achieved MDA had no radiologic
progression, compared with 57% of those who did not achieve MDA (P = 0.009).
CONCLUSION: Patients with active PsA achieving MDA with effective therapy have a 
significant reduction in radiographic progression. Aiming for low levels of
disease activity can improve the outcome of patients with PsA even in a
disease-modifying antirheumatic drug-resistant cohort. The new MDA criteria could
provide an objective target for treatment in trials and clinical practice.

PMID: 20589696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2008 Jan;22(1):19-24. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

A pilot study of pharmacokinetically guided dosing of oral methotrexate in the
initial phase of psoriasis treatment.

Hroch M(1), Chladek J, Simkova M, Vaneckova J, Grim J, Martinkova J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Hradec
Kralove, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Clinical studies of low-dose oral methotrexate (MTX) in the treatment
of psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis document a large interpatient variability
in the pharmacokinetics of MTX, including its polyglutamates (MTXPGs) in
erythrocytes (RBC). This can be a factor contributing to the variability of
therapeutic and toxic effects.
AIM: This pilot trial aimed to investigate the MTXPG concentrations in RBC as
well as their relation to therapeutic and adverse effects during the initial 4
months of pharmacokinetically guided therapy with a divided-dose schedule (three 
doses of MTX separated by 12-h intervals once a week).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Sixteen psoriatic patients (4 men and 12 women; mean age,
53 years; range, 28-69 years) with moderate-to-severe chronic plaque psoriasis
[mean Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) = 24; range, 9-42] were enrolled
in the study. Concentrations of plasma MTX and that of MTXPGs in RBC were assayed
using liquid chromatography methods. The area under the concentration-time curve 
of plasma MTX in the interval 0-8 h post-dose (AUC(0-8 h)) was measured after a
test bolus dose of 10 mg, and the starting weekly dose was individualized in
order to achieve the target AUC(0-8 h) of 1800 nmol.h/L. The PASI, biochemistry, 
and haematology tests and MTXPGs levels in RBC were evaluated at baseline and at 
4-week intervals.
RESULTS: The AUC(0-8 h )achieved 1360 +/- 425 nmol.h/L (mean +/- SD: range,
778-2400 nmol.h/L). The mean (range) of individualized doses was 14.5 mg/week
(7.5-22.5 mg). The mean (SD) steady-state concentration of total MTXPGs observed 
between days 85 to 110 reached 113 (34.6) nmol/L (range, 66.1-174 nmol/L). The
PASI decreased from 24.0 +/- 8.0 (mean +/- SD) at baseline to 8.0 +/- 6.1 at day 
110 (P < 0.001). Thirteen patients (87%) achieved a greater than 50% improvement 
in baseline PASI, and seven (47%) experienced a greater than 75% improvement.
There was no relationship between the percent improvement from baseline PASI and 
the steady-state concentration of MTXPGs in RBC. All patients tolerated MTX well.
Throughout the study period, there was a continuous increasing trend in the
geometric mean values of the mean corpuscular volume from 92.6 to 96.4 fL (P <
0.001) and of plasma homocysteine from 9.5 to 12.3 micromol/L (P < 0.005). The
geometric mean serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity slightly increased
from 0.49 to 0.80 microkat/L (P < 0.05). However, only two patients had the ALT
activity transiently elevated above twice the upper limit of normal.
CONCLUSION: Results of this pilot trial show that the steady-state levels of
MTXPGs in RBC vary less than threefold between patients and did not correlate
with the change in PASI observed after 4 months of therapy with an individualised
weekly dose of MTX. Whether pharmacokinetically guided dosing can improve the
results of psoriasis therapy with MTX should be prospectively tested in large
controlled studies.

PMID: 18031504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Jan;56(1):31.e1-15. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

A randomized comparison of continuous vs. intermittent infliximab maintenance
regimens over 1 year in the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis.

Menter A(1), Feldman SR, Weinstein GD, Papp K, Evans R, Guzzo C, Li S, Dooley LT,
Arnold C, Gottlieb AB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Baylor University Medical Center, UT Southwestern
Medical School, 5310 Harvest Hill Rd, Ste 260, Dallas, TX 75230, USA.
amderm@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Previous studies of infliximab in psoriasis have demonstrated rapid
improvement with induction therapy and sustained response with regularly
administered maintenance therapy.
OBJECTIVE: The efficacy and safety of continuous (every-8-week) and intermittent 
(as-needed) maintenance regimens were compared.
METHODS: Patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis (n = 835) were randomized to 
induction therapy (weeks 0, 2, and 6) with infliximab 3 mg/kg or 5 mg/kg or
placebo. Infliximab-treated patients were randomized again at week 14 to
continuous or intermittent maintenance regimens at their induction dose.
RESULTS: At week 10, 75.5% and 70.3% of patients in the infliximab 5 mg/kg and 3 
mg/kg groups, respectively, achieved PASI 75; 45.2% and 37.1% achieved PASI 90
(vs 1.9% [PASI 75] and 0.5% [PASI 90] for placebo; P < .001). Through week 50,
PASI responses were better maintained with continuous compared with intermittent 
therapy within each dose, and with 5 mg/kg compared with 3 mg/kg continuous
therapy.
LIMITATIONS: Longer term (>1 year) maintenance therapy and further study of
infliximab serum concentrations over this period, in both PASI 75 responders and 
non-responders, would be preferable.
CONCLUSIONS: Through week 50, response was best maintained with continuous
infliximab therapy. Infliximab was generally well-tolerated in most patients.

PMID: 17097378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Ann Rheum Dis. 1978 Aug;37(4):351-6.

Intra-articular methotrexate. Clinical and laboratory study in rheumatoid and
psoriatic arthritis.

Hall GH, Jones BJ, Head AC, Jones VE.

The effects of intra-articular methotrexate (MTX) were compared with saline in 20
patients with persistent knee effusions due to rheumatoid arthritis (15) and
psoriasis (5) in a double-blind pilot study. Clinical improvement was seen in
most patients given either MTX or saline and was attributed to joint irrigation
during arthroscopy and the placebo effects. MTX had a local anti-inflammatory
effect in the psoriatic arthropathies; the percentages of polymorphonuclear cells
and pyroninophilic mononuclear cells in synovial fluids fell sharply.
Intraarticular hydrocortisone acetate was not anti-inflammatory in 2 psoriatic
patients treated subsequently. The anti-inflammatory action of MTX in joints may 
resemble its effectiveness in controlling the rash of psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC1000243
PMID: 356763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32(20):1686-96. doi: 10.3109/09638281003649946.

Team-based rehabilitation improves long-term aerobic capacity and health-related 
quality of life in patients with chronic inflammatory arthritis.

Hagel S(1), Lindqvist E, Bremander A, Petersson IF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Lund University and Lund University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden. sofia.hagel@med.lu.se

PURPOSE: To examine the effect of an interdisciplinary, out-patient
rehabilitation programme for patients with chronic inflammatory arthritis on
aerobic capacity and health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
METHOD: One hundred and seventy-four patients, 115 with peripheral arthritis (PA)
(91 women, mean age 53 years, disease duration 16 years) and 59 with
spondylarthropathies (SpA), (27 women, mean age 46 years, disease duration 14
years) were consecutively enrolled in 18 days of interdisciplinary
rehabilitation. We report data from evaluations at inclusion, at discharge, and
at 4 and 12 months using a sub-maximal treadmill test of aerobic capacity and the
Nottingham Health Profile (NHP) (t-test).
RESULTS: At inclusion, less than 20% of all patients tested had aerobic capacity 
classified as 'average' or better. At discharge, 41% (PA) and 54% (SpA) reached
the 'average' level or better with improvements maintained for 12 months. The
total NHP scores improved in both groups (mean change -12 (99%CI -15, -9) for PA;
mean change -13 (99%CI -19, -8) for SpA) and were maintained.
CONCLUSION: Aerobic capacity and HRQOL improved significantly in this
interdisciplinary out-patient rehabilitation study, and improvements were
maintained for 12 months. The preserved level of aerobic capacity after 12 months
indicated a change to a more physically active lifestyle among the participants.

PMID: 20175678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Aug;64(8):1150-7. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Infliximab improves signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis: results of the
IMPACT 2 trial.

Antoni C(1), Krueger GG, de Vlam K, Birbara C, Beutler A, Guzzo C, Zhou B, Dooley
LT, Kavanaugh A; IMPACT 2 Trial Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate further in a phase III, double blind trial the efficacy
of infliximab in patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA), as observed in
the smaller IMPACT trial.
METHODS: 200 patients with active PsA unresponsive to previous treatment were
randomised to infusions of infliximab 5 mg/kg or placebo at weeks 0, 2, 6, 14,
and 22. Patients with inadequate response entered early escape at week 16. The
primary measure of clinical response was ACR20. Other measures included Psoriatic
Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC), Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI),
and dactylitis and enthesopathy assessments.
RESULTS: At week 14, 58% of patients receiving infliximab and 11% of those
receiving placebo achieved an ACR20 response and 77% of infliximab patients and
27% of placebo patients achieved PsARC (both p<0.001). Among the 85% of patients 
with at least 3% body surface area psoriasis involvement at baseline, 53/83 (64%)
patients receiving infliximab had at least 75% improvement in PASI compared with 
2/87 (2%) patients receiving placebo at week 14 (p<0.001). These therapeutic
effects were maintained through the last evaluation (week 24). Fewer infliximab
patients than placebo patients had dactylitis at week 14 (18% v 30%; p = 0.025)
and week 24 (12% v 34%; p<0.001). Fewer infliximab patients (22%) than placebo
patients (34%) had active enthesopathy at week 14 (p = 0.016); corresponding
figures at week 24 were 20% and 37% (p = 0.002). Infliximab was generally well
tolerated, with a similar incidence of adverse events in each group.
CONCLUSIONS: Infliximab 5 mg/kg through 24 weeks significantly improved active
PsA, including dactylitis and enthesopathy, and associated psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC1755609
PMID: 15677701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Apr;60(4):976-86. doi: 10.1002/art.24403.

Golimumab, a new human tumor necrosis factor alpha antibody, administered every
four weeks as a subcutaneous injection in psoriatic arthritis: Twenty-four-week
efficacy and safety results of a randomized, placebo-controlled study.

Kavanaugh A(1), McInnes I, Mease P, Krueger GG, Gladman D, Gomez-Reino J, Papp K,
Zrubek J, Mudivarthy S, Mack M, Visvanathan S, Beutler A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0943, USA.
akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

Erratum in
    Arthritis Rheum.2010 Aug;62(8):2555.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of golimumab in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Adult patients with PsA who had at least 3 swollen and 3 tender joints
and active psoriasis were randomly assigned to receive subcutaneous injections of
placebo (n = 113), golimumab 50 mg (n = 146), or golimumab 100 mg (n = 146) every
4 weeks through week 20. Efficacy assessments through week 24 included the
American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20), the Psoriasis 
Area and Severity Index (PASI) in patients in whom at least 3% of the body
surface area was affected by psoriasis at baseline, the Short Form 36 Health
Survey (SF-36), the disability index of the Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ), the Nail Psoriasis Severity Index (NAPSI), the physician's global
assessment of psoriatic nail disease, and enthesitis (using the PsA-modified
Maastricht Ankylosing Spondylitis Enthesitis Score [MASES] index).
RESULTS: At week 14, 48% of all patients receiving golimumab, 51% of patients
receiving golimumab 50 mg, and 45% of patients receiving golimumab 100 mg
achieved an ACR20 response (the primary end point), compared with 9% of patients 
receiving placebo (P < 0.001 for all comparisons). Among the 74% of patients in
whom at least 3% of the body surface area was affected by psoriasis at baseline, 
40% of those in the golimumab 50 mg group and 58% of those in the golimumab 100
mg group had at least 75% improvement in the PASI at week 14 (major secondary end
point), compared with 3% of placebo-treated patients (P < 0.001 for both doses). 
Significant improvement was observed for other major secondary end points (the
HAQ and the SF-36), the NAPSI, the physician's global assessment of psoriatric
nail disease, and the PsA-modified MASES index in each golimumab group compared
with placebo. This efficacy was maintained through week 24. Golimumab was
generally well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with golimumab at doses of 50 mg and 100 mg significantly
improved active PsA and associated skin and nail psoriasis through week 24.

PMID: 19333944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Br J Dermatol. 1974 Nov;91(5):573-7.

Low dose azaribine in the treatment of psoriasis.

Dantzig PI, McEvoy B, Mauro J, Rayhanzadeh S.

PMID: 4611468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2010 Jul;62(7):977-83. doi: 10.1002/acr.20161.

Measuring joint involvement in polyarticular psoriatic arthritis: an introduction
of alternatives.

Englbrecht M(1), Wang Y, Ronneberger M, Manger B, Vastesaeger N, Veale DJ, Schett
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3 and Institute for Clinical Immunology,
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
matthias.englbrecht@uk-erlangen.de

OBJECTIVE: To compare the reliability of 3 different simplified joint counts with
the gold standard 66 swollen/68 tender joint count (JC66/68) for assessing
clinical response in patients with polyarticular psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: The 28-joint count (JC28), in the same way that it is used in rheumatoid
arthritis, and 2 measures including distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints (the
32-joint count [JC32], including all finger joints as well as wrists and knees,
and 36-joint count [JC36], which additionally included elbows and ankles), were
compared with the JC66/68 in 182 patients using data from the Infliximab
Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis Controlled Trial 2 trial database. Pearson's
correlation coefficients were calculated to compare the swollen and tender JC28, 
JC32, and JC36 with the corresponding results of the total JC66/68. American
College of Rheumatology (ACR) responses based on the individual measures were
compared, and their ability in predicting a clinical response of ACR 20%
improvement (ACR20) based on the JC66/68 was assessed by calculating the area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve via logistic regression and the
maximum Youden indices at weeks 14 and 24.
RESULTS: All simplified joint counts were highly correlated to the standard
JC66/68 both for tenderness and swelling at each individual visit (Pearson's
correlation coefficients consistently >0.8, n = 182-200; P < 0.0001). Logistic
regression for ACR20 response showed that area under the curve was constantly
>0.91, with comparable results for Youden indices of the simplified joint counts.
CONCLUSION: All simplified joint counts considered seemed sufficiently sensitive 
and specific to measure clinical response in trial patients with polyarticular
PsA when compared with the JC66/68, no matter whether DIP joints were included
(the JC36 and JC32) or excluded (the JC28). Further research will be needed to
clarify this issue.

PMID: 20191568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Ann Rheum Dis. 1985 Mar;44(3):189-93.

A double-blind controlled trial of etretinate (Tigason) and ibuprofen in
psoriatic arthritis.

Hopkins R, Bird HA, Jones H, Hill J, Surrall KE, Astbury C, Miller A, Wright V.

Etretinate (Tigason) and ibuprofen have been compared in a double-blind
controlled trial in psoriatic arthritis to see if we could confirm a specific
action for this vitamin A derivative suggested from earlier uncontrolled studies.
Eleven out of 20 patients completed 24 weeks of therapy with etretinate (up to
0.5 mg/kg/day) whereas only 1/20 patients completed 24 weeks of therapy with
ibuprofen alone. Etretinate improved skin lesions, and this may have encouraged
patients to persist with it. Improvement of statistical significance was seen for
articular index in both groups. In addition significant improvement in ESR,
haemoglobin, C-reactive protein, and histidine occurred in the etretinate group. 
The main side effects of etretinate (which may preclude its use at a higher dose 
in this condition) included cracked and dried lips and sore mouth.

PMCID: PMC1001603
PMID: 3883917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Br J Dermatol. 1980 Oct;103(4):411-5.

Psoriatic arthritis treated with oral zinc sulphate.

Clemmensen OJ, Siggaard-Andersen J, Worm AM, Stahl D, Frost F, Bloch I.

Twenty-four patients suffering from psoriatic arthritis participated in a double 
blind cross-over trial of peroral zinc sulphate versus placebo (Trial I). Eleven 
patients continued an open trial of peroral zinc sulphate for an additional 24
weeks (Trial II). Remission was assessed by the disappearance of symptoms
(overall condition, morning stiffness, functional capacity of the joints and
joint pains), and signs (mobility and swelling of the joints). Reduction of joint
pains as well as increase of mobility and decrease of swelling of several joints 
were observed. the clinical signs of reduced inflammation were accompanied
biochemically by reduction of serum immunoglobulins and an increase of serum
albumin. The need for analgesics was diminished. Severe side-effects and changes 
in the psoriatic skin involvement were not seen. Oral zinc sulphate seems to be
valuable in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 7002197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Curr Med Res Opin. 1976;4(1):65-9.

A comparative pilot study of azapropazone and indomethacin in the treatment of
psoriatic arthritis and Reiter's disease.

Lassus A.

A double-blind crossover study to compare 1200 mg. azapropazone per day with 100 
mg. indomethacin per day was carried out on 34 patients with psoriatic arthritis 
and 16 patients with Reiter's disease. The same comparison was initiated in 8
additional patients but withdrawn in 3 cases because of side-effects to
indomethacin, in 2 cases because of side-effects to azapropazone, and in the 3
remaining cases for other stated reasons. The results of the study showed no
overall difference between the treatment results of azapropazone and
indomethacin, but azapropazone seemed to be more effective in cases with
psoriatic arthritis and indomethacin in cases with Reiter's disease. Indomethacin
caused more side-effects than azapropazone. Neither drug seemed to influence the 
skin manifestations of either disease.

PMID: 770082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Rheumatol. 2006 Apr;33(4):712-21. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Continued inhibition of radiographic progression in patients with psoriatic
arthritis following 2 years of treatment with etanercept.

Mease PJ(1), Kivitz AJ, Burch FX, Siegel EL, Cohen SB, Ory P, Salonen D,
Rubenstein J, Sharp JT, Dunn M, Tsuji W.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.
pmease@nwlink.com

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2006 Apr;33(4):642-3.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical and radiographic responses were evaluated in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) treated for up to 2 years with etanercept.
METHODS: Patients were previously randomized to receive placebo or etanercept in 
a double-blind study and chose to participate in the current open-label extension
phase. All patients received etanercept 25 mg twice weekly. Radiographic
progression was determined at baseline, 1 year, and 2 years using the Sharp
method modified to include joints frequently affected in PsA. Arthritis and
psoriasis responses were determined using American College of Rheumatology 20%
(ACR20) improvement criteria, PsA response criteria (PsARC), and the psoriasis
area severity index (PASI).
RESULTS: Of 205 patients randomized, 169 entered open-label, and 141 [71
randomized to receive placebo (placebo/etanercept) and 70 randomized to receive
etanercept (etanercept/etanercept)] had radiographic data available for analysis 
at 2 years. ACR20 criteria, PsARC, and PASI 50 criteria were met by 64%, 84%, and
62%, respectively, of etanercept/etanercept patients at the end of the 48-week
open-label period. Placebo/etanercept patients achieved comparable results within
12 weeks that were sustained at 48 weeks (63%, 80%, and 73%). Radiographic
progression was inhibited in the etanercept/ etanercept patients (mean adjusted
change in total Sharp score of -0.38 from baseline to 2 yrs). In
placebo/etanercept patients, disease progression was inhibited once patients
began receiving etanercept (mean adjusted change of -0.22 from 1 year to 2
years). Adverse event rates were similar to those observed during randomized
phase, with only one serious adverse event deemed possibly related to etanercept.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate a sustained benefit of etanercept treatment,
including inhibition of radiographic progression, in patients with PsA.

PMID: 16463435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Ter Arkh. 1986;58(7):38-43.

[Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with gold salts (chrysotherapy)].

[Article in Russian]

Burdeĭnyĭ AP, Sigidin IaA, Novoselova TM.

The paper is concerned with the results of a 6- and 12-month comparative
randomized study of the efficacy of chrysanol
(calcium-aurothiopropanol-sulfonate) in 21 patients with verified psoriatic
arthritis. Patients of the study group (11 patients) received in addition to
chrysanol nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs (NAD), patients of the control group 
(10) received NAD only. The efficacy of annual treatment was assessed in 10
patients (5 in each group). Therapeutic efficacy was assessed on the basis of an 
analysis of 19 clinical and laboratory findings. Six months later improvement was
noted in 80% of the patients of the study group, of them considerable improvement
in 30%. A significant positive time course was observed for 9 parameters
including those characterizing vertebral mobility. Improvement in the control
group was noted in 50% of the patients, 2 parameters changed significantly. One
year later improvement was recorded in all the patients of the study group and in
40% of the patients of the control group. A significant positive time course was 
noted for 10 parameters in the study group and not a single one in the control
group. In the latter group 7 values got worse, the deterioration of one value was
statistically significant. Side effects of chrysanol were noted in 2 patients
(agranulocytosis and nephropathy). The aggravation of skin psoriasis was not
noted in any patients.

PMID: 3532401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009 Jan;301(1):1-13. doi: 10.1007/s00403-008-0883-9. Epub
2008 Sep 6.

Antigens from Leishmania amastigotes induced clinical remission of psoriasis.

O'Daly JA(1), Lezama R, Rodriguez PJ, Silva E, Indriago NR, Peña G, Colorado I,
Gleason J, Rodríguez B, Acuña L, Ovalles T.

Author information: 
(1)Astralis LTD, 75 Passaic Ave, Fairfield, 07004, NJ, USA. joseodaly@aol.com

While injecting volunteers in Venezuela with a vaccine for prevention of
leishmaniasis, we observed 100% clinical remission of a psoriatic lesion in one
subject. Subsequently, the vaccine (AS100) was evaluated in psoriatic patients
with an open label, single center study. The study was conducted in 2,770
subjects and included plaque (79%), guttate (10%), plaque and guttate (10%),
palm/plantar, erythrodermia, inverse, plaque and arthritis and nail psoriasis.
Baseline PASI compared with post-treatment values were: PASI 100, 23%; PASI 75,
45%; PASI 50, 13%; PASI 10, 9% and <PASI 10, 3% of patients. Adverse events,
attributed to the treatment drug were rated mild or moderate in severity, with
none being classified as serious. Subsequently, the results were confirmed in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study, of multiple doses of
AS100. In conclusion, AS100 demonstrated a favorable benefit/risk profile and
merits further development for the treatment of psoriasis.

PMID: 18777031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2002 Jun;46(6):886-91.

Treatment of psoriasis with the chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor
necrosis factor alpha, infliximab.

Schopf RE(1), Aust H, Knop J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Psoriatic skin lesions in patients with Crohn's disease or psoriatic 
arthritis have shown improvement during infliximab treatment.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of our study was to systematically assess the effects of
infliximab in patients with psoriatic skin lesions.
METHODS: Eight patients with severe psoriasis were enrolled in an open-label
clinical trial. Patients received infliximab, 5 mg/kg, intravenously at weeks 0, 
2, and 6. The Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) was used to monitor
disease activity at weeks 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 14. Week 10 was the end point of
the treatment phase; week 14 was the follow-up end point. Pruritus was assessed
on a scale of 0 to 3. Histologic sections were prepared from biopsy specimens of 
uninvolved skin and of psoriatic lesions at weeks 0, 1, and 10 to measure
epidermal thickness with the use of a microscopic micrometer grid.
RESULTS: The PASI diminished from 21.8 +/- 4.2 (mean +/- SE) at week 0 to 3.4 +/-
2.0 at week 10, corresponding to 10.7% +/- 4.3% of the original values (100%); on
follow-up at week 14, the PASI was 7.1 +/- 2.7 (or still 33.3% +/- 11.3% of the
values at week 0). Pruritus decreased from 2.5 +/- 0.26 at week 0 to 0.43 +/- 0.2
at week 10 and to 0.83 +/- 11.3 at week 14. Likewise, epidermal thickness
(acanthosis) tended to normalize from 0.41 +/- 0.06 mm at week 0 to 0.14 +/- 0.02
mm at week 10. No adverse effects other than fatigue during infusion on some
occasions were reported.
CONCLUSION: Although psoriasis tends to recur beyond 2 months of the infusions,
this open study provides evidence that infliximab is an effective treatment.

PMID: 12063486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986 Jan;14(1):49-52.

Effects of oral meclofenamate therapy in psoriasis.

Ellis CN, Goldfarb MT, Roenigk HH Jr, Rosenbaum M, Wheeler S, Voorhees JJ.

One hundred three patients entered a study to evaluate the effects of oral
meclofenamate sodium therapy on psoriasis. The first 4 weeks of the study were
double-blind, with patients receiving either meclofenamate or placebo. Most
patients receiving meclofenamate had no change in their psoriasis, in comparison 
with their pretherapy condition. There was no difference in the response of the
psoriasis between the group taking meclofenamate and the group taking placebo.
Eighty-nine patients continued in a 4-week open trial of meclofenamate.
Approximately one third of the patients showed improvement, but this result
appeared to be related to the open trial design. Since oral meclofenamate therapy
was not associated with frequent worsening of psoriasis, it is an appropriate
treatment for psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 3512633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2008 Mar;22(3):345-52. Epub 2007 Nov 14.

Clinical effectiveness and safety experience with efalizumab in the treatment of 
patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in Taiwan: results of an
open-label, single-arm pilot study.

Tsai TF(1), Liu MT, Liao YH, Licu D.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. tftsai@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: No clinical trial of efalizumab has been conducted in Asia.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy and safety of efalizumab in Taiwanese
patients with psoriasis.
METHODS: This is an open-label, single-arm pilot study conducted at two centres. 
Patients were given 1 mg/kg efalizumab subcutaneously once a week for 12 weeks
and were then followed up for a further 12 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 49 patients participated in the study. The median improvement
in Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) during the treatment period was
19.6%, and a >or= 50% improvement in PASI was seen in 20.4%. Rebound was seen in 
17.8% of patients, and anti-efalizumab antibodies were detected in 41% of
patients. The most frequent adverse events were headache (34.7%),
arthralgia/arthritis (28.6%), psoriasis events (new form/exacerbation; 26.5%) and
pruritus (22.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: This small pilot study indicated that efalizumab was effective in
improving psoriasis symptoms in Taiwanese patients, with no new safety issues
identified.

PMID: 18005021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2010 Sep;9(4):229-37.

Population pharmacokinetic evaluation of a fully human IgG monoclonal antibody in
patients with inflammatory diseases.

Tabrizi M(1), Wang B, Lu H, Huang S, Bell G, Schwab G, Roskos L.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen (Fremont) Inc., 6701 Kaiser Drive, Fremont, CA 94556, USA.
mtabrizi@anaptysBio.com

ABX-IL8 is a fully human IgG₂ monoclonal antibody generated using transgenic
mouse technology (Xenomouse®) that binds to human Interleukin-8 with high
affinity and specificity. The objective of this study was to evaluate the
pharmacokinetic (PK) properties of ABX-IL8 in patients with active inflammatory
diseases. Patients with psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis received single or
multiple short intravenous infusions of ABX-IL8 or placebo. Serum concentrations 
of ABX-IL8, baseline serum IgG and IgG₂ concentrations and Anti-Drug Antibody
(ADA) response to ABX-IL8 were determined using relevant immunoassays.
Pharmacokinetic analyses of the serum ABX-IL8 concentration-time data were
performed. Following single-dose administration of ABX-IL8, dose proportional
increases in drug exposure were observed. Consistent with the disposition
properties of the endogenous IgG antibodies, ABX-IL8 appeared to be primarily
distributed into the plasma compartment and the extra-vascular fluid and the
steady-sate volume of distribution (61 ± 14 to 71 ± 14 mL/kg) was comparable to
that for the endogenous antibodies. Following the multiple-dose administration,
PK properties of the antibody were linear with dose and time. Steady-state
clearance (2.6 ± 1.1 to 2.7 ± 1.4 mL/day/kg) was similar to that observed
following the single dose administration and no ADA response was detected
throughout the study. PK variability and serum exposure to ABX-IL8 following
administration of the fixed doses were comparable to those observed following
administration of the weight-adjusted doses; the impact of body weight on
clearance was minimal and this correlation did not translate into requirements
for body weight-adjusted dosing. Additionally, age and disease type (psoriasis or
RA) had no impact on ABX-IL8 pharmacokinetics.

PMID: 20860546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Lancet. 1986 Oct 18;2(8512):926-7.

Gamma interferon and psoriasis.

Schulze HJ, Mahrle G.

PMID: 2876361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Jul;50(7):2264-72.

Etanercept treatment of psoriatic arthritis: safety, efficacy, and effect on
disease progression.

Mease PJ(1), Kivitz AJ, Burch FX, Siegel EL, Cohen SB, Ory P, Salonen D,
Rubenstein J, Sharp JT, Tsuji W.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.
pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: Etanercept has been shown to improve the articular and cutaneous
manifestations of psoriatic arthritis (PsA). In this study, we further evaluated 
the safety, efficacy, and effect on radiographic progression of etanercept in
patients with PsA.
METHODS: Patients with PsA (n = 205) were randomized to receive placebo or 25 mg 
etanercept subcutaneously twice weekly for 24 weeks. Patients continued to
receive blind-labeled therapy in a maintenance phase until all had completed the 
24-week phase, then could receive open-label etanercept in a 48-week extension.
Efficacy and safety were evaluated at 4, 12, and 24 weeks and at 12-week
intervals thereafter. Radiographs of the hands and wrists were assessed at
baseline and 24 weeks, at entry to the open-label phase, and after 48 weeks in
the study.
RESULTS: Etanercept significantly reduced the signs and symptoms of PsA and
psoriasis. At 12 weeks, 59% of etanercept patients met the American College of
Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria for joint response, compared with 15% of
placebo patients (P < 0.0001), and results were sustained at 24 and 48 weeks. At 
24 weeks, 23% of etanercept patients eligible for psoriasis evaluation achieved
at least 75% improvement in the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index, compared with 
3% of placebo patients (P = 0.001). Radiographic disease progression was
inhibited in the etanercept group at 12 months; the mean annualized rate of
change in the modified total Sharp score was -0.03 unit, compared with +1.00 unit
in the placebo group (P = 0.0001). Etanercept was well tolerated.
CONCLUSION: Etanercept reduced joint symptoms, improved psoriatic lesions,
inhibited radiographic progression, and was well tolerated in patients with PsA.

PMID: 15248226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(3):R117. doi: 10.1186/ar3054. Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Effectiveness and safety of adalimumab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis or
psoriatic arthritis and history of anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy.

Rudwaleit M(1), Van den Bosch F, Kron M, Kary S, Kupper H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department I, Rheumatology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin
Hospital, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany. publications@jkmed.com

INTRODUCTION: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists reduce the signs and
symptoms of spondyloarthritides, including ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and
psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness and
safety of adalimumab, 40 mg every other week, for patients with AS or PsA and
prior treatment with infliximab (IFX) and/or etanercept (ETN).
METHODS: Both trials were 12-week, open-label studies with an optional extension 
period up to week 20. Patients were stratified by history of anti-TNF treatment, 
prior anti-TNF therapy received (IFX, ETN, or both), and reason for
discontinuation of prior TNF antagonist. ETN was discontinued>or=3 weeks, and IFX
was discontinued>or=2 months before the first adalimumab administration.
Effectiveness at week 12 was evaluated by using observed standard-outcome
measurements for AS and PsA.
RESULTS: At week 12 of adalimumab treatment, Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease 
Activity Index 50 responses were achieved by 40.8% of 326 patients with AS who
had received prior anti-TNF therapy and by 63.0% of 924 patients with AS who were
naive to TNF antagonist. Observed response rates were generally greater for
patients who discontinued the prior anti-TNF therapy because of loss of response 
or intolerance than for patients who discontinued because of lack of response.
Median changes in swollen-joint count and in enthesitis score were similar in
patients with and without prior TNF-antagonist treatment. Modified PsA response
criteria were fulfilled by 71.2% of 66 patients with PsA, with prior exposure to 
TNF antagonists, and by 78.8% of 376 patients with no history of anti-TNF
therapy. The percentages of patients with PsA attaining a Physician's Global
Assessment of psoriasis of "Clear/Almost clear" increased from 33.3% to 61.0% for
patients with prior IFX and/or ETN treatment and from 34.6% to 69.7% for patients
without anti-TNF therapy. The median change in the Nail Psoriasis Severity Index 
was -6 for both groups. In both studies, patterns of adverse events were similar 
for patients with and without prior anti-TNF therapy and were consistent with the
known safety profile of adalimumab.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with AS or PsA previously treated with IFX and/or ETN
experienced clinically relevant improvements of their diseases after 12 weeks of 
adalimumab.
TRIAL REGISTRATIONS: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00478660 and NCT00235885.

PMCID: PMC2911911
PMID: 20553600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Apr;67(4):914-23. doi: 10.1002/art.39008.

Randomized controlled trial of adalimumab in patients with nonpsoriatic
peripheral spondyloarthritis.

Mease P(1), Sieper J, Van den Bosch F, Rahman P, Karunaratne PM, Pangan AL.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center and University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Apr;67(4):865-8.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;67(10):2791-3.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;67(10):2793-4.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;67(10):2793.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of adalimumab in patients with
active nonpsoriatic peripheral spondyloarthritis (SpA).
METHODS: ABILITY-2 is an ongoing phase III, multicenter study of adalimumab
treatment. Eligible patients age ≥18 years fulfilled the Assessment of
SpondyloArthritis international Society (ASAS) classification criteria for
peripheral SpA, did not have a prior diagnosis of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis 
(PsA), or ankylosing spondylitis (AS), and had an inadequate response or
intolerance to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Patients were
randomized 1:1 to receive adalimumab 40 mg every other week or matching placebo
for 12 weeks, followed by a 144-week open-label period. The primary end point was
the proportion of patients achieving 40% improvement in disease activity
according to the Peripheral SpA Response Criteria (PSpARC40) at week 12. This was
defined as ≥40% improvement from baseline (≥20-mm absolute improvement on a
visual analog scale) in patient's global assessments of disease activity and
pain, and ≥40% improvement in at least one of the following features: swollen
joint and tender joint counts, total enthesitis count, or dactylitis count.
Adverse events were recorded throughout the study.
RESULTS: In total, 165 patients were randomized to a treatment group, of whom 81 
were randomized to receive placebo and 84 to receive adalimumab. Baseline
demographics and disease characteristics were generally similar between the 2
groups. At week 12, a greater proportion of patients receiving adalimumab
achieved a PSpARC40 response compared to patients receiving placebo (39% versus
20%; P = 0.006). Overall, improvement in other outcomes was greater in the
adalimumab group compared to the placebo group. The rates of adverse events were 
similar in both treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with adalimumab ameliorated the signs and symptoms of
disease and improved physical function in patients with active nonpsoriatic
peripheral SpA who exhibited an inadequate response or intolerance to NSAIDs,
with a safety profile consistent with that observed in patients with AS, PsA, or 
other immune-mediated diseases.

© 2015 AbbVie, Inc. Arthritis & Rheumatology is published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4409087
PMID: 25545240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Rheumatol Suppl. 1978;4:97-100.

A critical review of the effect of levamisole in rheumatic diseases other than
rheumatoid arthritis.

Rosenthal M.

Levamisole has been used in several rheumatic diseases other than rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). These include systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
polymyositis/dermatomyositis, scleroderma, Sjögren's syndrome, psoriatic
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, Reiter's syndrome and juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis. Most of the published data have either been case reports including
very few patients or have been concerned with specific clinical or laboratory
assessments. It was therefore very difficult to make any reliable evaluation of
the effect of levamisole in these conditions. Levamisole might have had some
beneficial effect in some of the diseases listed but properly conducted,
controlled trials are necessary before any definitive assessment can be made.

PMID: 366146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Reumatizam. 1978;25(3):79-81.

[Use of indomethacin in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in Croatian]

Daniliv LN.

PMID: 353936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Clin Rheum Dis. 1983 Dec;9(3):671-80.

Psoriatic arthritis.

Bird HA, Wright V.

PMID: 6360520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Apr;70(4):705-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.131359. Epub 2010 Jul 
20.

Tumour necrosis factor alpha blockade is associated with sustained regression of 
carotid intima-media thickness for patients with active psoriatic arthritis: a
2-year pilot study.

Tam LS, Li EK, Shang Q, Tomlinson B, Li M, Leung YY, Kuan WP, Kwok LW, Li TK, Zhu
Y, Kun EW, Yip G, Yu CM.

PMID: 20647274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Apr;70(4):712-4. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.130864. Epub 2010 Aug 
31.

Etanercept plus ciclosporin versus etanercept plus methotrexate for maintaining
clinical control over psoriatic arthritis: a randomised pilot study.

Atzeni F, Boccassini L, Antivalle M, Salaffi F, Sarzi-Puttini P.

PMID: 20810394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004 Feb;63(2):156-61.

Treatment of refractory psoriatic arthritis with infliximab: a 12 month
observational study of 16 patients.

Feletar M(1), Brockbank JE, Schentag CT, Lapp V, Gladman DD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital,
Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Oct;64(10):1519-20.
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2004 Nov;63(11):1531-2; author reply 1532.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effectiveness and toxicity of infliximab in patients
with recalcitrant psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients with treatment resistant PsA and at least six actively inflamed
joints, who had failed to respond to at least two disease modifying agents, were 
included. Infliximab (5 mg/kg) was given at weeks 0, 2, 6, and every 6-8 weeks
pending response. Clinical and laboratory measures included actively inflamed
joint count (AJC), swollen joint count (SJC), psoriasis severity (PASI), HAQ, and
SF-36. Response was defined as at least a 30% reduction in AJC and PASI.
Differences from baseline were analysed using the signed rank test.
RESULTS: Sixteen patients (12 male, 4 female), mean age 48 and disease duration
14 years, were included. At baseline the mean AJC was 22.5 and mean PASI 4.5.
Eleven patients continued receiving methotrexate. The AJC did not show a
statistically significant response. SJC improved significantly at week 54 (p =
0.01). The PASI improved significantly at weeks 14 (p = 0.001) and 30 (p = 0.002)
and CRP was reduced significantly at week 30 (p = 0.02). The HAQ score improved
at week 30 (p = 0.02). Six patients became positive for dsDNA without clinical
features of a connective tissue disease. Six patients discontinued treatment
owing to lack of efficacy (1) and toxicity (5). Other serious adverse events
included: urticaria (3); thrombocytopenia (1); lower gastrointestinal bleeding
(2); severe diarrhoea (2); serious infections (6). Raised transaminases, at least
1.5x normal, occurred in four patients.
CONCLUSION: In refractory PsA, infliximab led to a marked improvement in
psoriasis but modest response in joint disease. Toxicity and rate of treatment
termination was high.

PMCID: PMC1754892
PMID: 14722204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Drugs Dermatol. 2005 Nov-Dec;4(6):735-9.

Puerto Rico psoriasis study group: efficacy and safety of etanercept.

González-Chavez JR(1), Berlingeri-Ramos AC, Sánchez Casiano MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Puerto Rico, San 
Juan.

BACKGROUND: Although major advances in the understanding of its pathogenesis have
been achieved, psoriasis remains an incurable disease. In April 2004, etanercept,
an antagonist of TNF-alpha, was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for 
the treatment of chronic, moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults. In this 
study we intend to document the efficacy and further establish the safety profile
of etanercept for the treatment of moderate to severe psoriasis in our population
and compare our data to the Leonardi et al study published in 2003.
METHODS: A total of 26 patients were followed for a period of 24 weeks. Subjects 
were administered 25 mg of etanercept subcutaneously twice weekly for 24 weeks.
Patients were seen every 4 weeks to measure clinical improvement by means of the 
psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) scores. Development of side effects was 
also assessed.
RESULTS: Ninety-two percent of the patients had an improvement of greater than
50% in their PASI score, with 79% of these patients with a PASI improvement of
75% or greater. Adverse events were uncommon and none required the permanent
discontinuation of treatment.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with etanercept was well-tolerated and resulted in
significant sustained improvement of psoriasis throughout a period of 24 weeks.
Our data strongly correlates with the findings reported by Leonardi et al in
2003.

PMID: 16302559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. N Z Med J. 1985 Jun 26;98(781):490-2.

Double-blind evaluation of piroxicam and naproxen following missed dosage in
patients with inflammatory arthritis.

Langley GB, Fowles M, Sirett P, Vlieg M, Wigley RD.

We conducted two separate double-blind withdrawal studies in parallel; one
involved 20 patients taking piroxicam 20 mg daily, and the other involved 20
patients taking naproxen 750 mg daily. After 48 hour withdrawal of active
medication, the naproxen group showed significant deterioration in eight of the
14 parameters measured and the piroxicam group in one of the 14 parameters
measured. The deterioration in the naproxen group was significantly greater than 
that in the piroxicam group in five of the 14 parameters measured. These findings
are consistent with the long half-life of piroxicam and suggest that
non-compliance leading to omission of piroxicam for two days is of less clinical 
importance than omission of naproxen for two days.

PMID: 3892383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Br J Rheumatol. 1994 Oct;33(10):954-8.

A double-blind placebo controlled trial of Efamol Marine on skin and joint
symptoms of psoriatic arthritis.

Veale DJ(1), Torley HI, Richards IM, O'Dowd A, Fitzsimons C, Belch JJ, Sturrock
RD.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Dundee.

Fish oil may be beneficial in the treatment of psoriasis and in RA. We examined
the potential benefit of Efamol Marine, a combination of evening primrose oil and
fish oil in the treatment of 38 patients with PsA. Patients with PsA were entered
in a double-blind placebo controlled study and received either 12 Efamol Marine
capsules or 12 placebo capsules daily for 9 months. All patients received placebo
capsules for a further 3 months. At month 3 of the study patients were asked to
reduce their intake of NSAIDs and maintain that decrease provided there was no
worsening of their joint symptoms. Clinical assessments of skin and joint disease
severity and activity were performed at 0, 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. All measures
of skin disease activity including severity, percentage body affected and itch
were unchanged by Efamol Marine. The NSAID requirement remained the same between 
both treatment groups. In addition, there was no change demonstrated in the
activity of arthritis as measured by duration of morning stiffness. Ritchie
articular index, number of active joints, ESR and CRP. However, a rise in serum
TXB2 was observed in the active group during the placebo phase; in addition a
fall in leukotriene B4 production occurred during the active phase period
followed by a marked rise during the placebo phase suggesting some laboratory
documented anti-inflammatory effect. In conclusion, this study suggests that
Efamol Marine may alter prostaglandin metabolism in patients with PsA, although
it did not produce a clinical improvement and did not allow reduction in NSAID
requirement. A larger dose of essential fatty acid may be needed to produce a
clinical benefit.

PMID: 7921757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1995 Jun;24(6):411-21.

Infections during low-dose methotrexate treatment in rheumatoid arthritis.

Boerbooms AM(1), Kerstens PJ, van Loenhout JW, Mulder J, van de Putte LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1996 Apr;25(5):357-9.

We studied the infection rate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treated 
with low-dose methotrexate (MTX) in a 6-year open prospective study and in a
12-month randomized double blind trial comparing MTX with azathioprine (AZA) that
was followed by a 3-year open prospective study. The literature on infections
during low dose MTX in RA was reviewed. We also did a search for therapy-related 
opportunistic infections in RA and in MTX-treated psoriasis and psoriatic
arthropathy patients. In our studies the infection rate during MTX treatment was 
higher in severe RA than in moderate RA. In severe RA there were often 2
infections simultaneously. The majority of the infections occurred in the first
1.5 years of treatment. There was no difference in the infection rate of MTX and 
AZA in the comparative trial. In the literature the infection rate was highest in
short-term double-blind studies. Opportunistic infections are increasingly
reported in RA treated with MTX and rarely with AZA, cyclosporine A, and
cyclophosphamide or in MTX treated psoriasis and psoriatic arthropathy. In RA it 
appears that the initial period of treatment with MTX is the most vulnerable
phase for infections, with the exception of opportunistic infections, which are
not limited to a certain treatment period. Probably there are more MTX-associated
infections in severe RA than in moderate RA.

PMID: 7667645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Apr;69(4):671-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.113308. Epub 2009 Sep 
9.

Effectiveness and retention rates of methotrexate in psoriatic arthritis in
comparison with methotrexate-treated patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Lie E(1), van der Heijde D, Uhlig T, Heiberg MS, Koldingsnes W, Rødevand E,
Kaufmann C, Mikkelsen K, Kvien TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Vinderen, Oslo, Norway.
elisabeth_lie@yahoo.no

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effectiveness and 2-year retention rates of
methotrexate (MTX) in MTX naïve patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Data on 430 patients with PsA participating in an ongoing longitudinal
observational multicentre study in Norway were analysed. 1218 MTX naïve patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) from the same study served as a reference
population. Assessments included measures of disease activity (28 joint counts,
acute phase reactants), health status and utility scores. Six-month effectiveness
data were compared both by crude analyses and with adjustments for age, sex and
the respective baseline values. Two-year drug survival was compared by
Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analyses.
RESULTS: After 6 months of MTX treatment, both patients with PsA and those with
RA improved in most disease activity measures and patient reported outcomes. In
the adjusted analysis, patients with PsA tended to have less improvement, but
changes were in the same range as in patients with RA. Two-year retention rates
of MTX therapy in patients with PsA and RA were 65% and 66%, respectively, with
only minor differences in reported reasons for discontinuation. Lower age, longer
disease duration and higher Modified Health Assessment Questionnaire (MHAQ) score
and patient global assessment were independent predictors of MTX termination
within the first 2 years of treatment.
CONCLUSION: In this real-life study, MTX treatment was associated with
improvement in disease activity and health-related quality of life in patients
with PsA after 6 months of treatment. Retention rates of MTX were similar in PsA 
and RA.

PMID: 19740904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2006 Oct;62(4):435-45.

Pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered etanercept in subjects with
psoriasis.

Nestorov I(1), Zitnik R, DeVries T, Nakanishi AM, Wang A, Banfield C.

Author information: 
(1)ZymoGenetics, Seattle, WA, USA.

AIMS: To present the results of the pharmacokinetic analysis of the
concentration-time profiles of etanercept, a soluble receptor tumour necrosis
factor (TNF) antagonist, in more than 1300 subjects with psoriasis.
METHODS: Pharmacokinetic samples were collected in one phase-2 and two phase-3
placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials. Study 1 evaluated a 25-mg twice
weekly (BIW) etanercept dosing regimen administered by subcutaneous (s.c.)
injection for 24 weeks. Study 2 evaluated 25-mg BIW and 50-mg BIW s.c. doses for 
12 weeks. Study 3 evaluated 25 mg once weekly (QW), 25 mg BIW and 50 mg BIW s.c. 
doses for 24 weeks.
RESULTS: The mean +/- SD steady-state predose serum concentrations of etanercept 
for the 25-mg BIW arm at 12 weeks in study 1 were 1590 +/- 885 ng ml(-1). In
study 2, mean +/- SD etanercept steady-state concentrations at 12 weeks were 1900
+/- 1110 ng ml(-1) in the 25-mg BIW group and 3830 +/- 1870 ng ml(-1) in the
50-mg BIW group. The mean +/- SD steady-state predose serum concentrations of
etanercept at 12 weeks in study 3 were 768 +/- 475 ng ml(-1) for the 25-mg QW
regimen, 1990 +/- 1030 ng ml(-1) for the 25-mg BIW regimen and 4020 +/- 2100 ng
ml(-1) for the 50-mg BIW regimen.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacokinetic results were highly consistent across clinical
trials. The concentration-time profiles displayed dose proportionality.
Etanercept concentrations in subjects with psoriasis are similar to the
concentrations in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1636685
PMID: 16995864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 3;5(9). pii: e12556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012556.

Soluble biomarkers of cartilage and bone metabolism in early proof of concept
trials in psoriatic arthritis: effects of adalimumab versus placebo.

van Kuijk AW(1), DeGroot J, Koeman RC, Sakkee N, Baeten DL, Gerlag DM, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, F4-218, Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: There is growing interest in soluble biomarkers that could be used on
the group level for screening purposes in small proof of principle studies during
early drug development. We investigated early changes in serum levels of several 
candidate biomarkers involved in cartilage and bone metabolism following the
initiation of adalimumab as a prototypic active treatment in psoriatic arthritis 
(PsA) compared to placebo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-four PsA patients were randomized to receive either
adalimumab 40 mg s.c. every other week or placebo for 4 weeks, followed by an
open label extension phase. Serum samples were obtained at baseline and after 4
and 12 weeks of treatment and analyzed for levels of CPII and PINP (synthesis of 
type II and type I procollagen), melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) (chondrocyte 
anabolism), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-3, C2C and cartilage oligomeric matrix
protein (COMP) (type II collagen degradation), osteocalcin (OC) (bone formation),
NTX-I and ICTP (both type I collagen degradation).
RESULTS: After 4 weeks, there was a significant decrease in serum MMP-3 levels in
adalimumab-treated patients (P<0.005), while no change was observed in the
placebo group. A significant increase in serum MIA was noted after adalimumab
therapy (P<0.005) but not after placebo treatment. After 12 weeks, there was a
marked reduction in serum MMP-3 in both groups (P<0.005), whereas other markers
did not show significant changes compared to baseline.
CONCLUSION: MMP-3 and MIA could serve as soluble biomarkers associated with
inflammation as well as joint remodelling and destruction and may, together with 
clinical evaluation and in combination with other biomarkers, assist in
distinguishing between effective and ineffective therapy in small,
proof-of-principle studies of short duration in PsA.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN23328456.

PMCID: PMC2937309
PMID: 20844595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Assoc Physicians India. 1994 Nov;42(11):860-2.

Methotrexate in psoriatic arthritis.

Singh YN(1), Verma KK, Kumar A, Malaviya AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.

Thirty three patients with psoriatic arthritis were treated with starting dose of
7.5 mg of methotrexate orally, every week for a period of 6 months to 7 years
(mean 2.2 years) along with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents. The dose of
methotrexate during the course of therapy ranged 5 to 15 mg/week (mean 7.8 mg).
There was complete to partial remission in arthritis and psoriatic skin lesions
in 94% (31) patients. No response was noticed in 2 patients. Regular monitoring
of haematological, renal and liver function tests was done. No significant side
effects of the drug, requiring discontinuation of the therapy, were seen during
the treatment. Methotrexate can be used early in the course of psoriatic
arthritis with good results.

PMID: 7868484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Rheumatol. 2010 Jun;37(6):1221-7. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.091093. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Patient-reported outcomes in a randomized trial of etanercept in psoriatic
arthritis.

Mease PJ(1), Woolley JM, Singh A, Tsuji W, Dunn M, Chiou CF.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates and Swedish Medical Center, 1101 Madison
Street, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of etanercept treatment on patient-reported
outcomes (PRO) in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: A 24-week double-blind comparison to placebo was followed by a 48-week
open-label phase in which all eligible patients received etanercept. PRO were
measured using the Stanford Health Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index
(HAQ-DI), the Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form (SF-36), the EQ-5D visual analog 
scale (VAS), and the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) patient pain
assessment.
RESULTS: Beginning at Week 4 and continuing through Week 24 of double-blind
treatment, patients treated with etanercept had significantly higher mean
percentage improvement in HAQ-DI relative to baseline than patients given placebo
(53.6% vs 6.4% at Week 24; p < 0.001). After 48 weeks of open-label treatment
with etanercept, the mean percentage change from study baseline was 52.8% for the
original etanercept group and 46.9% for the original placebo group, with 41.2% of
patients overall achieving a HAQ-DI of 0. Mean changes relative to baseline for
SF-36 physical component summary scores, EQ-5D VAS, and ACR pain assessment were 
also significant in the double-blind period for etanercept compared with placebo 
(p < 0.001 for all 3 measures). Patients taking placebo achieved similar
improvements once they began treatment with etanercept in the open-label period.
CONCLUSION: Patients with PsA treated with etanercept reported significant
improvements in physical function that were almost 10 times the improvement seen 
with placebo and were maintained for up to 2 years. Almost half of patients
treated with etanercept reported no disability by the end of the study.

PMID: 20395648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Hypertens. 2012 Jun;25(6):644-50. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2012.12. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Effect of 1-year anti-TNF-α therapy on aortic stiffness, carotid atherosclerosis,
and calprotectin in inflammatory arthropathies: a controlled study.

Angel K(1), Provan SA, Fagerhol MK, Mowinckel P, Kvien TK, Atar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology B, Oslo University Hospital Ullevaal, Oslo, Norway.
kristin.angel@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Premature arterial stiffening and atherosclerosis are increased in
patients with inflammatory arthropathies such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA),
ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). The proinflammatory
protein calprotectin is associated with inflammatory arthropathies, vascular
pathology, and acute coronary events. We examined the long-term effects of
treatment with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists on aortic stiffness and 
carotid intima media thickness (CIMT) in patients with inflammatory
arthropathies, and the relationships to the levels of calprotectin.
METHODS: Fifty-five patients with RA, AS, or PsA and a clinical indication for
anti-TNF-α therapy were included and followed with regular examinations for 1
year. Thirty-six patients starting with anti-TNF-α therapy were compared with a
nontreatment group of 19 patients. Examinations included assessments of aortic
stiffness (aortic pulse wave velocity, aPWV), CIMT, and plasma calprotectin.
RESULTS: After 1 year, aPWV (mean (s.d.)) was improved in the treatment group,
but not in the control group (-0.54 [0.79] m/s vs. 0.06 [0.61] m/s, respectively;
P = 0.004), and CIMT progression (median (quartile cut-points, 25th and 75th
percentiles)) was reduced in the treatment group compared to the control group
(-0.002 [-0.038, 0.030] mm vs. 0.030 [0.011, 0.043] mm, respectively; P = 0.01). 
In multivariable analyses, anti-TNF-α therapy over time was associated with
improved aPWV (P = 0.02) and reduced CIMT progression (P = 0.04), and
calprotectin was longitudinally associated with aPWV (P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term anti-TNF-α therapy improved aortic stiffness and CIMT
progression in patients with inflammatory arthropathies. Calprotectin may be a
soluble biomarker reflecting aortic stiffening in these patients.

PMCID: PMC3635528
PMID: 22378036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Ann Rheum Dis. 2001 Nov;60 Suppl 3:iii37-40.

Cytokine blockers in psoriatic arthritis.

Mease PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates and Division of Clinical Research, Swedish
Hospital Medical Centre, and University of Washington, 98104, USA.
pmease@u.washington.edu

The cellular events underlying the pathogenesis of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and 
psoriasis have not yet been fully elucidated. Nevertheless, some clues to these
conditions are beginning to emerge. In particular, a growing body of data
supports the role of proinflammatory cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor
(TNF), in the pathophysiology of PsA and psoriasis. Raised levels of these
cytokines are found in the joints of patients with PsA, as well as in psoriatic
skin lesions. Physiotherapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents,
corticosteroids, and disease modifying antirheumatic agents, such as
methotrexate, are the most commonly used treatments for PsA. However, the data
supporting the effectiveness of these treatments are limited, and disease
resolution is usually incomplete. This study examined the effects of etanercept, 
a TNF inhibitor, in patients with PsA. Etanercept treatment was well tolerated
and resulted in significant improvement in the signs and symptoms of PsA and in
psoriatic skin lesions. Infliximab, another TNF inhibitor, has also been shown to
be effective in patients with PsA. Such studies confirm the importance of
proinflammatory cytokines in PsA, and hold out hope for patients who require new 
options for the treatment of their disease.

PMCID: PMC1766666
PMID: 11890650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Lancet. 2009 Feb 21;373(9664):633-40. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60140-9. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Ustekinumab, a human interleukin 12/23 monoclonal antibody, for psoriatic
arthritis: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial.

Gottlieb A(1), Menter A, Mendelsohn A, Shen YK, Li S, Guzzo C, Fretzin S,
Kunynetz R, Kavanaugh A.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2009 Apr 18;373(9672):1340.
    Lancet. 2010 Nov 6;376(9752):1542.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2009 May;5(5):241-2.
    Lancet. 2009 Feb 21;373(9664):605-6.
    Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2009 Aug;11(4):233-4.

BACKGROUND: Since some patients with psoriatic arthritis do not respond to
typical drug treatments, alternatives are needed. Findings suggest that
interleukins 12 and 23 might affect clinical symptoms and pathological joint
changes of psoriatic arthritis. Ustekinumab is a human monoclonal antibody that
inhibits receptor-binding of these cytokines. We aimed to assess the efficacy and
safety of ustekinumab for psoriatic arthritis in this phase II study.
METHODS: We undertook a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover
study at 24 sites in North America and Europe. Patients with active psoriatic
arthritis were randomly allocated via interactive voice response system to either
ustekinumab (90 mg or 63 mg) every week for 4 weeks (weeks 0-3) followed by
placebo at weeks 12 and 16 (n=76; Group 1) or placebo (weeks 0-3) and ustekinumab
(63 mg) at weeks 12 and 16 (n=70; Group 2). The first 12 weeks of the study were 
placebo-controlled. Masking was maintained to week 16, and patients were followed
up to week 36 [corrected]. The primary endpoint was ACR20 response at week 12.
Analysis was by intention to treat. This trial is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00267956.
FINDINGS: At week 12, 32 (42%) patients in Group 1 and ten (14%) in Group 2
achieved the primary endpoint (difference 28% [95% CI 14.0-41.6]; p=0.0002). Of
124 (85%) participants with psoriasis affecting 3% or more body surface area, 33 
of 63 (52%) in Group 1 and three of 55 (5%) in Group 2 had a 75% or greater
improvement in psoriasis area and severity index score at week 12 (47%
[33.2-60.6]; p<0.0001). During the placebo-controlled period (weeks 0-12),
adverse events arose in 46 (61%) patients in Group 1 and 44 (63%) in Group 2;
serious adverse events were recorded in three (4%) Group 2 patients (none in
Group 1).
INTERPRETATION: Ustekinumab significantly reduced signs and symptoms of psoriatic
arthritis and diminished skin lesions compared with placebo, and the drug was
well tolerated. Larger and longer term studies are needed to further characterise
ustekinumab efficacy and safety for treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 19217154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Rheumatol Suppl. 1985 Dec;12 Suppl 12:3-6.

Historical perspective on the use of methotrexate for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis.

Ward JR.

Aminopterin, a folic acid analogue was first reported in 1948 to produce
temporary remission of acute leukemia of children, was also reported in 1951 to
produce an important and rapid improvement in patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) and psoriasis. By 1972, low dose pulse methotrexate was observed to be
useful in RA, but it was not until 1980 that additional beneficial effects of
methotrexate in the treatment of patients with refractory RA appeared in the
literature. Subsequently, both uncontrolled experience and double blind
prospective trials have demonstrated efficacy and acceptable tolerability and
safety of methotrexate in the treatment of patients with RA. Guidelines for its
use in patients with RA still need to be developed.

PMID: 3913774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Rheumatol. 1992 Nov;19(11):1724-6.

Chloroquine therapy in psoriatic arthritis.

Gladman DD(1), Blake R, Brubacher B, Farewell VT.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatic Disease Unit, University of Toronto, ON, Canada.

Our aim was to examine the efficacy of chloroquine in psoriatic arthritis (PsA)
and to assess whether chloroquine therapy exacerbated psoriasis. Thirty-two
patients had been given chloroquine therapy while attending the University of
Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic. Twenty-four patients continued therapy for at
least 6 months, and 18, or 75%, demonstrated > 30% reduction in the actively
inflamed joint count. Moreover, there was a significant decrease in the number of
actively inflamed joints. A control group, consisting of 24 patients taking no
remittive agents, seen during the same period of time, was identified. Only 14,
or 58%, of these patients had a > 30% reduction in inflamed joint count over a
6-month period. This pattern was not significantly different (p = 0.19) from the 
chloroquine treated group. Of the 32 patients who had been given chloroquine, a
total of 6 had an exacerbation of psoriasis, only 1 discontinued therapy. There
was no case of exfoliative dermatitis. Six of the 24 control patients had an
exacerbation of psoriasis. Our experience suggests that chloroquine may be an
effective treatment in PsA, and that it does not exacerbate psoriasis. A
prospective, randomized, double blind, controlled trial of antimalarial therapy
in PsA is warranted.

PMID: 1491390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Rheumatol Int. 1983;3(3):109-12.

A simple pressure dolorimeter for the quantification of joint tenderness in
inflammatory arthritis.

Langley GB, Fowles M, Sheppeard H, Wigley RD.

A simple pressure dolorimeter for the detection and quantification of joint
tenderness is described and evaluated. The pressure dolorimeter was more
sensitive than a modified Ritchie Index in measuring degree of joint tenderness
and as sensitive in detecting tender joints. The interobserver error of the
pressure dolorimeter was low, and in a drug withdrawal study, the pressure
dolorimeter was able to detect change in joint tenderness whereas the
conventional Ritchie Index was not. These results suggest that the pressure
dolorimeter is a simple, reliable and sensitive instrument for measuring joint
tenderness in patients with inflammatory joint disease. It is also inexpensive
and readily available.

PMID: 6366987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Immunol Res. 2012 Jun;52(3):169-75. doi: 10.1007/s12026-011-8247-5.

Inflammatory synovial fluid microenvironment drives primary human chondrocytes to
actively take part in inflammatory joint diseases.

Röhner E(1), Matziolis G, Perka C, Füchtmeier B, Gaber T, Burmester GR,
Buttgereit F, Hoff P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Charité University Hospital,
Berlin, Germany.

The role of human chondrocytes in the pathogenesis of cartilage degradation in
rheumatic joint diseases has presently gained increasing interest. An active
chondrocyte participation in local inflammation may play a role in the initiation
and progression of inflammatory joint diseases and in a disruption of cartilage
repair mechanisms resulting in cartilage degradation. In the present study, we
hypothesized that inflammatory synovial fluid triggers human chondrocytes to
actively take part in inflammatory processes in rheumatic joint diseases. Primary
human chondrocytes were incubated in synovial fluids gained from patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis arthritis and reactive arthritis. The detection
of vital cell numbers was determined by using Casy Cell Counter System. Apoptosis
was measured by Annexin-V and 7AAD staining. Cytokine and chemokine secretion was
determined by a multiplex suspension array. Detection of vital cells showed a
highly significant decrease in chondrocyte numbers. Flow cytometry demonstrated a
significant increase in apoptotic chondrocytes after the incubation. An active
secretion of cytokines such as MCP-1 and MIF by chondrocytes was observed. The
inflammatory synovial fluid microenvironment mediates apoptosis and cell death of
chondrocytes. Moreover, in terms of cytokine secretion, it also induces an active
participation of chondrocytes in ongoing inflammation.

PMID: 21979468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Patient Educ Couns. 2009 Jun;75(3):334-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2009.03.001. Epub
2009 Apr 3.

A randomized controlled trial of an intervention to reduce low literacy barriers 
in inflammatory arthritis management.

Rudd RE(1), Blanch DC, Gall V, Chibnik LB, Wright EA, Reichmann W, Liang MH, Katz
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Society, Human Development and 
Health, Boston, MA 02115, United States. rrudd@hsph.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: Test the efficacy of educational interventions to reduce literacy
barriers and enhance health outcomes among patients with inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: The intervention consisted of plain language information materials
and/or two individualized sessions with an arthritis educator. Randomization was 
stratified by education level. Principal outcomes included adherence to
treatments, self-efficacy, satisfaction with care, and appointment keeping.
Secondary outcomes included health status and mental health. Data were collected 
at baseline, six, and twelve months post.
RESULTS: Of the 127 patients, half had education beyond high school and three
quarters had disease duration greater than five years. There were no differences 
in the primary outcome measures between the groups. In mixed models controlling
for baseline score and demographic factors, the intervention group showed
improvement in mental health score at six and twelve months (3.0 and 3.7 points, 
respectively), while the control group showed diminished scores (-4.5 and -2.6
points, respectively) (p=0.03 and 0.01).
CONCLUSION: While the intervention appears to have had no effect on primary
outcomes, further studies with continued attention to literacy are warranted.
Study site and disease duration must be considered as participants in this study 
had higher than average health literacy and had established diagnoses for years
prior to this study.
PRACTICE IMPLICATIONS: The study offers insight into an application of many of
the protocols currently recommended to ameliorate effects of limited literacy.

PMCID: PMC2748845
PMID: 19345053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Dermatolog Treat. 2006;17(6):343-52.

Use of etanercept for psoriatic arthritis in the dermatology clinic: the
Experience Diagnosing, Understanding Care, and Treatment with Etanercept
(EDUCATE) study.

Gottlieb AB(1), Kircik L, Eisen D, Jackson JM, Boh EE, Strober BE, Frankel E, Xia
HA, Stevens SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA
02111-1533, USA. agottlieb@tufts-nemc.org

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and tolerability of etanercept to treat
psoriatic arthritis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 1,122 patients who had active psoriatic
arthritis were enrolled in a Phase 4, non-randomized, open-label, single-arm,
24-week study. These patients had clinically stable, plaque psoriasis involving
>or=10% body surface area and joint disease (either >or=two swollen and >or=two
tender/painful joints for >or=3 months, or >or=one joint with sacroiliitis or
spondylitis). They received etanercept therapy 50 mg subcutaneously once weekly
for 24 weeks.
RESULTS: After 24 weeks of treatment, 865 patients (77.1%; 95% CI: 74.64-79.55%) 
achieved a 'mild or better' score on the physician global assessment of psoriasis
and were improved from baseline. Mean improvement in body surface area
involvement was 16.9 percentage points (15.89-17.91). Patient global assessment
of psoriasis, joint pain, and joint disease scores were improved by means of 2.2 
(2.15-2.34), 2.7 (2.53-2.84), and 1.5 (1.39-1.55), respectively. Thirty-five
patients (3.1%) experienced at least one serious adverse event. No patient died
during the study.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the effectiveness and tolerability of
etanercept treatment in patients with psoriatic arthritis being treated at
dermatology clinics.

PMID: 17853307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(3):R113. doi: 10.1186/ar3049. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Risk factors for radiographic progression in psoriatic arthritis: subanalysis of 
the randomized controlled trial ADEPT.

Gladman DD(1), Mease PJ, Choy EH, Ritchlin CT, Perdok RJ, Sasso EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, 399 Bathurst Street, Room 1E-410B, Toronto, Ontario M5T
2S8, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: To identify independent predictors of radiographic progression in
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) for patients treated with adalimumab or placebo in the 
Adalimumab Effectiveness in PsA Trial (ADEPT).
METHODS: Univariate analyses and multivariate linear regression analyses assessed
risk for radiographic progression (change in modified total Sharp score,
DeltamTSS>0.5) from baseline to week 24 for C-reactive protein (CRP) and other
baseline variables, and for 24-week time-averaged CRP (univariate analysis only).
Subanalyses determined mean DeltamTSS for CRP subgroups. Analyses were post hoc, 
with observed data.
RESULTS: One hundred and forty-four adalimumab-treated patients and 152
placebo-treated patients were assessed. Mean CRP was 64% lower by week 2 with
adalimumab and essentially unchanged with placebo. Univariate analyses indicated 
that elevated CRP at baseline and time-averaged CRP were strongly associated with
radiographic progression for placebo-treated patients but not for
adalimumab-treated patients. Multivariate analysis confirmed that elevated
baseline CRP was the only strong independent risk factor for radiographic
progression (for CRP>or=1.0 mg/dl: odds ratio=3.28, 95% confidence interval=1.66 
to 6.51, P<0.001). Adalimumab treatment reduced risk of progression approximately
fivefold. The difference between mean DeltamTSS for adalimumab versus placebo was
greatest for patients with baseline CRP>or=2.0 mg/dl (-0.5 vs. 2.6).
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic inflammation in PsA, as indicated by elevated baseline CRP,
was the only strong independent predictor of radiographic progression. This
association was observed predominantly for placebo-treated patients. Adalimumab
treatment substantially reduced the overall risk of radiographic progression, and
provided greatest radiographic benefit for patients with the greatest CRP
concentrations at baseline.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial registration: NCT00195689.

PMCID: PMC2911906
PMID: 20537151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Oct;52(10):3279-89.

Adalimumab for the treatment of patients with moderately to severely active
psoriatic arthritis: results of a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
trial.

Mease PJ(1), Gladman DD, Ritchlin CT, Ruderman EM, Steinfeld SD, Choy EH, Sharp
JT, Ory PA, Perdok RJ, Weinberg MA; Adalimumab Effectiveness in Psoriatic
Arthritis Trial Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington
98104, USA. pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: Adalimumab, a fully human, anti-tumor necrosis factor monoclonal
antibody, was evaluated for its safety and efficacy compared with placebo in the 
treatment of active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients with moderately to severely active PsA and a history of
inadequate response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs were randomized to
receive 40 mg adalimumab or placebo subcutaneously every other week for 24 weeks.
Study visits were at baseline, weeks 2 and 4, and every 4 weeks thereafter. The
primary efficacy end points were the American College of Rheumatology 20%
improvement (ACR20) response at week 12 and the change in the modified total
Sharp score of structural damage at week 24. Secondary end points were measures
of joint disease, disability, and quality of life in all patients, as well as the
severity of skin disease in those patients with psoriasis involving at least 3%
of body surface area.
RESULTS: At week 12, 58% of the adalimumab-treated patients (87 of 151) achieved 
an ACR20 response, compared with 14% of the placebo-treated patients (23 of 162) 
(P < 0.001). At week 24, similar ACR20 response rates were maintained and the
mean change in the modified total Sharp score was -0.2 in patients receiving
adalimumab and 1.0 in those receiving placebo (P < 0.001). Among the 69
adalimumab-treated patients evaluated with the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index 
(PASI), 59% achieved a 75% PASI improvement response at 24 weeks, compared with
1% of the 69 placebo-treated patients evaluated (P < 0.001). Disability and
quality of life measures were also significantly improved with adalimumab
treatment compared with placebo. Adalimumab was generally safe and
well-tolerated.
CONCLUSION: Adalimumab significantly improved joint and skin manifestations,
inhibited structural changes on radiographs, lessened disability due to joint
damage, and improved quality of life in patients with moderately to severely
active PsA.

PMID: 16200601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Skeletal Radiol. 1999 Apr;28(4):196-201.

The prevalence of sacroilitis in psoriatic arthritis: new perspectives from a
large, multicenter cohort. A Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study.

Battistone MJ(1), Manaster BJ, Reda DJ, Clegg DO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Utah Medical Center, Salt Lake City
84132, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis
in a large population of patients with psoriatic arthritis.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Patients were recruited from 15 clinical centers. This was
part of a large, multicenter study of patients with an established diagnosis of
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, or reactive arthritis. For this
cohort, an established diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis was required, with
cutaneous manifestations and involvement of at least three appendicular joints.
At entry, patients were not selected for the presence of axial involvement.
Radiographs - one anteroposterior view of the pelvis and one oblique view of each
sacroiliac joint - were graded using the New York classification scale by a
musculoskeletal radiologist masked to the specific diagnosis and clinical
symptoms. Re-evaluation of 10% of the films 3 years later quantified
intraobserver variability.
RESULTS: Two hundred and two patients with psoriatic arthritis were studied.
Duration of the disease averaged 12 years; all patients had psoriasis and
peripheral arthritis. The prevalence of radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis
(grade 2 or higher) was 78%; 71% of these had grade 3 disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Previously reported prevalence of sacroiliitis in patients with
psoriatic arthritis ranges from 30% to 50%. The prevalence of radiographic
evidence of sacroiliitis in this large multicenter cohort of patients with
appendicular psoriatic arthritis was substantially higher.

PMID: 10384989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Apr;66(4):498-505. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

Infliximab maintains a high degree of clinical response in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis through 1 year of treatment: results from the IMPACT 2 trial.

Kavanaugh A(1), Krueger GG, Beutler A, Guzzo C, Zhou B, Dooley LT, Mease PJ,
Gladman DD, de Vlam K, Geusens PP, Birbara C, Halter DG, Antoni C; IMPACT 2 Study
Group.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovative Therapy, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and
Immunology, University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0943, USA, and University Hospital Leuven, Belgium. akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of infliximab through 1 year in
patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) enrolled in the IMPACT 2 trial.
METHODS: In this double blind, placebo controlled, phase III study, 200 patients 
with active PsA were randomised to receive infusions of infliximab 5 mg/kg or
placebo at weeks 0, 2, 6, and every 8 weeks thereafter through 1 year. Patients
with persistent disease activity could enter early escape at week 16, and all
remaining placebo patients crossed over to infliximab at week 24. Patients
randomised to infliximab who had no response or who lost response could escalate 
their dose to 10 mg/kg starting at week 38. Clinical efficacy was assessed based 
on the proportion of patients achieving ACR 20 and PASI 75 responses. Major
clinical response (that is, maintenance of ACR 70 response for 24 continuous
weeks) was assessed for the first time in PsA.
RESULTS: Through 1 year of treatment, 58.9% and 61.4% of patients in the
randomised infliximab and placebo/infliximab groups, respectively, achieved ACR
20; corresponding figures for PASI 75 were 50.0% and 60.3%. At week 54, major
clinical response was achieved by 12.1% of patients in the infliximab group. The 
safety profile of infliximab through week 54 was consistent with that seen
through week 24. Two malignancies occurred: basal cell skin cancer (placebo) and 
stage I Hodgkin's lymphoma (infliximab).
CONCLUSION: Infliximab maintains a high degree of clinical efficacy and continues
to be well tolerated in patients with PsA through 1 year of treatment.

PMCID: PMC1856065
PMID: 17114188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Arthritis Rheum. 2002 Oct 15;47(5):506-12.

Open-label study of infliximab treatment for psoriatic arthritis: clinical and
magnetic resonance imaging measurements of reduction of inflammation.

Antoni C(1), Dechant C, Hanns-Martin Lorenz PD, Wendler J, Ogilvie A, Lueftl M,
Kalden-Nemeth D, Kalden JR, Manger B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany.
christian.antoni@med3.imed.uni-erlangen.de

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate infliximab efficacy and safety in disease-modifying
antirheumatic drug-unresponsive psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In a 54-week, open-label, compassionate-use study, 10 patients received 
intravenous infliximab (5 mg/kg; weeks 0, 2, 6; individualized dosing after week 
10). Patients continued their current therapy (stable dose) until week 10.
Assessments were performed at weeks 2, 6, 10, and 54. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) objectively measured joint inflammation at weeks 0 and 10.
RESULTS: Patients achieved a 20% improvement according to the American College of
Rheumatology (ACR) criteria (ACR20) in all patients by week 2; 8 patients
improved 70% (ACR70) at week 10; 6 patients maintained ACR70 after week 54. Week 
10 MRI revealed an 82.5% mean reduction in inflammation from baseline, and
psoriasis area and severity index scores were reduced by 71.3% +/- 16.7%. There
were no significant adverse events, severe infections, or infusion reactions.
CONCLUSION: Infliximab was effective, safe, and well tolerated in PsA. Arthritis 
and psoriasis improved in all patients during the 54-week evaluation. Further
investigation of the use of infliximab for PsA and psoriasis is warranted.

PMID: 12382299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Mar;60(3):402-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2008.09.050. Epub 
2008 Nov 25.

Alefacept with methotrexate for treatment of psoriatic arthritis: open-label
extension of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Mease PJ(1), Reich K; Alefacept in Psoriatic Arthritis Study Group.

Collaborators: Atkins CT, Baraf H, Brzezicki J, Chwalinska-Sadowska H, Filipowicz
Sosnowska A, Furie RA, Gladman DD, Gromnica-Ihle E, Haraoui B, Jeka S, Kaltwasser
JP, Keystone EC, Khraishi M, Klemenova I, Koubanova A, Lomareva N, Mease PJ,
Mencel Z, Moreland LW, Nasonov E, Pope JE, Racewicz A, Ritchlin CT, Samtsov A,
Schmidt E, Szerla J, Thorne C, Yakusevich V.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, Division of Rheumatology Research, Swedish
Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. pmease@nwlink.com

Erratum in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009 Sep;61(3):507.

BACKGROUND: A single course of alefacept intramuscularly in combination with
methotrexate (MTX) was effective in treating both psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the efficacy and safety of an additional course
of alefacept intramuscularly in combination with MTX in patients with PsA.
METHODS: In this open-label extension study, patients with PsA on stable doses of
MTX were treated with an additional 12 weekly intramuscular injections of
alefacept followed by 12 weeks of observation. Efficacy of PsA treatment was
measured as 20% reduction in American College of Rheumatology criteria (ACR20).
RESULTS: At the end of the open-label extension phase, 86 of 160 (54%) patients
achieved ACR20, of which 28 of 55 had received placebo plus MTX and 58 of 105
received alefacept plus MTX in the prior double-blind phase. Although there was
no increase in the proportion of patients achieving ACR20 after a second course
of alefacept plus MTX, those achieving ACR50 and ACR70 increased from 17% and 7%,
respectively, in the double-blind phase to 32% and 12%, respectively, in the
open-label extension phase.
LIMITATIONS: In this open-label extension phase of the study there was no control
group and the effect on psoriasis in these patients was not measured.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with psoriasis and PsA on stable doses of MTX derive
benefit for both conditions from one or more courses of alefacept, with further
benefit in PsA apparent after a second course of treatment. No additional
toxicity was observed.

PMID: 19028407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Mar;45(3):321-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Efficacy, effectiveness and safety of etanercept in monotherapy for refractory
psoriatic arthritis: a 26-week observational study.

de Vlam K(1), Lories RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Leuven, katholieke
Universitet Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Kurt.devlam@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the efficacy, effectiveness and safety of etanercept, 
a soluble tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor, in a prospective observational
cohort of patients with refractory psoriatic arthritis and polyarticular
involvement.
METHODS: Twenty patients with psoriatic arthritis refractory to conventional
anti-rheumatic drugs were treated with etanercept 25 mg subcutaneously twice a
week for 26 weeks. Efficacy and safety were recorded at weeks 2, 6, 10, 16, 20
and 26. Effectiveness, defined as clinical remission, reduction of 50% in
clinical parameters and concomitant NSAID use, was evaluated at 26 weeks.
RESULTS: Etanercept therapy was efficacious in this cohort as 85% of the patients
met the Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criterion at week 26. Effectiveness of
etanercept for the individual patient was demonstrated, since at least 50% of the
patients had a 90 and 85% improvement in swollen and tender joint count,
respectively, and a 71% improvement in the Health Assessment Questionnaire at
week 26. Four patients showed complete remission and NSAIDs were stopped in 10/15
patients. The most common adverse events were upper respiratory tract infections.
Interestingly, in two patients psoriasis worsened during the study, unrelated to 
the course of arthritis. The administration of etanercept was interrupted in
three patients for adverse events: one septic bursitis, one myocardial infarction
and one tooth abscess. After resolution of the adverse events, etanercept was
successfully reintroduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Etanercept in monotherapy is efficacious, effective and safe in the 
majority of patients with refractory psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 16234275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 May;54(5):1638-45.

Alefacept in combination with methotrexate for the treatment of psoriatic
arthritis: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Mease PJ(1), Gladman DD, Keystone EC; Alefacept in Psoriatic Arthritis Study
Group.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. pmease@nwlink.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of alefacept in combination with
methotrexate (MTX) for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients were eligible for this randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial if they were ages 18-70 years and had active PsA (> or =
3 swollen joints and > or = 3 tender joints) despite treatment with MTX for > or 
= 3 months (a stable dosage for > or = 4 weeks prior to enrollment). Patients
were stratified according to psoriasis body surface area (BSA) involvement (> or 
= 3% or < 3%). Alefacept (15 mg) or placebo was administered intramuscularly once
weekly for 12 weeks in combination with MTX, followed by 12 weeks of observation 
during which only MTX treatment was continued. The primary efficacy end point was
the proportion of patients achieving a 20% improvement in disease activity
according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria (an ACR20 response) at
week 24.
RESULTS: One hundred eighty-five patients were randomly assigned to receive
alefacept plus MTX (n = 123) or placebo plus MTX (n = 62). At week 24, 54% of
patients in the alefacept plus MTX group achieved an ACR20 response, compared
with 23% of patients in the placebo plus MTX group (P < 0.001). Mean reductions
in tender and swollen joint counts in patients receiving alefacept plus MTX were 
-8.0 and -6.3, respectively. In patients with psoriasis involving > or = 3% BSA
(n = 87), a 50% reduction from the baseline Psoriasis Area Severity Index at week
14 was achieved by 53% of patients receiving alefacept plus MTX compared with 17%
of those receiving placebo plus MTX (P < 0.001). Most adverse events were mild to
moderate in severity. In the alefacept plus MTX group, the incidence of serious
adverse events was low (1.6%), and no opportunistic infections or malignancies
were reported.
CONCLUSION: Alefacept in combination with MTX may be an effective and safe
treatment for PsA.

PMID: 16646026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Ann Med Interne (Paris). 1996;147(1):15-9.

[Blood prolactin under the effect of protirelin in spondylarthropathies.
Treatment trial of 4 cases of reactive arthritis and 2 cases of psoriatic
arthritis with bromocriptine].

[Article in French]

Eulry F(1), Mayaudon H, Bauduceau B, Lechevalier D, Crozes P, Magnin J,
Claude-Berthelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Bégin, Saint-Mandé.

Prolactin radioimmunoassay was carried out before and 15, then 30 min after
intravenous infusion of protireline (0.2 mg) in 3 groups of male patients: 7 with
reactive arthritis (HLA B27: 6; age: 25 +/- 6.3 yr), 13 with ankylosing
spondylitis (HLA B27: 11; age: 33.2 +/- 14.7 yr), 5 with psoriatic arthritis (HLA
B27: 1; age: 28.8 +/- 6.3 yr). The same test was carried out in sex-age-body mass
index matched controls. Only the patients with reactive arthritis presented
dynamic hyperprolactinaemia 15 and 30 min after protireline infusion and none of 
ankylosing or psoriatic arthritis groups. A complete failure of bromocriptine was
observed in reactive arthritis. In 2 cases of psoriatic arthritis, adding
bromocriptine to gold salts and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug was followed 
by a drastic efficacy with spectacular improvement in clinical, biological and
occupational status. Because none of the cases had hyperprolactinaemia,
bromocriptine acted probably had an intrinic anti-inflammatory effect independent
of its antiprolactinic effect.

PMID: 8763085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jun;66(6):778-81. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Efficacy of infliximab on MRI-determined bone oedema in psoriatic arthritis.

Marzo-Ortega H(1), McGonagle D, Rhodes LA, Tan AL, Conaghan PG, O'Connor P,
Tanner SF, Fraser A, Veale D, Emery P.

Author information: 
(1)Consultant Rheumatologist, Academic Unit of Musculoskeletal Disease, Chapel
Allerton Hospital, Chapeltown Road, Leeds LS7 4SA, UK. medhmo@leeds.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is commonly associated with bone pathology,
including entheseal new bone formation and osteolysis. On MRI, areas of active
clinical involvement are represented by bone oedema and synovitis.
AIM: To assess the impact of infliximab on bone oedema in PsA as shown by MRI.
METHODS: 18 patients with joint swelling, psoriasis and seronegativity for
rheumatoid factor received four infusions of infliximab, 3 mg/kg, in combination 
with methotrexate. MRI of the affected hand (12 patients) or knee joints (6
patients) was performed before and after treatment. The primary outcome was the
assessment of bone oedema and synovitis at 20 weeks as shown by MRI. Secondary
outcomes included the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) response criteria,
psoriasis skin scores (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)) and a quality of
life measure (Psoriatic Arthritis Quality of Life (PsAQoL)).
RESULTS: At baseline, bone oedema was seen in 50% of patients (seven hands and
two knees) in 30% of scanned joints, and this improved or resolved in all cases
in the hand joints (p = 0.018) and in one knee joint at 20 weeks. Synovitis was
found to be reduced in 90% of cases on MRI. Likewise, a significant improvement
in all clinical outcomes, including PASI (p = 0.003) and PsAQoL (p = 0.006) was
seen at week 20. 65% (n = 11) of the patients achieved an ACR response, of whom
45% had ACR70 or above and 54% had ACR20 or ACR50.
CONCLUSIONS: Infliximab treatment is associated with dramatic improvements in
MRI-determined bone oedema in PsA in the short term. It remains to be determined 
whether infliiximib treatment is the cause for prevention of new bone formation, 
bone fusion or osteolysis in PsA as shown by radiography.

PMCID: PMC1954680
PMID: 17185324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Br J Dermatol. 2005 Sep;153(3):531-6.

Cytokine profiles during infliximab monotherapy in psoriatic arthritis.

Mastroianni A(1), Minutilli E, Mussi A, Bordignon V, Trento E, D'Agosto G,
Cordiali-Fei P, Berardesca E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Dermatology, San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Via Chianesi 53,
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Biological therapies are a new breakthrough in the treatment of
psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Among these, tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha antagonists such as infliximab and etanercept are the most promising 
as TNF is considered to be essential in driving cytokine cascade at sites of
cutaneous and synovial inflammation in this disease.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the time-related response of serum cytokine release
during infliximab monotherapy and assess serum cytokine levels in order to
provide a fast, minimally invasive tool to monitor and/or predict efficacy of
anti-TNF-alpha therapy.
METHODS: Twenty patients affected by PsA with Psoriasis Area and Severity Index
(PASI) score between 0.4 and 42.8 were treated with infliximab for 30-42 weeks.
The assessment of arthritis severity was performed using the American College of 
Rheumatology (ACR) criteria and ultrasonography evaluation. The treatment
schedule consisted of infliximab (5 mg kg(-1) intravenously) at 0, 2 and 6 weeks 
and every 12 weeks on an individual basis determined by therapeutic results and
adverse events reported. At baseline and before every infusion blood samples were
taken to assess serum cytokine levels [TNF-alpha, interleukin (IL-6), E-selectin,
vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF),
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-2)].
RESULTS: Eighteen of 20 psoriatic patients achieved > 50% improvement and 14 of
20 patients attained > 75% improvement in the PASI score at 10 weeks. All
arthritic patients achieved > 50% improvement (ACR-50) and 16 of 20 patients
attained > 75% improvement (ACR-75) at 10 weeks. TNF-alpha did not decrease
immediately during the first part of the study. A significant decrease was
detected at week 12 (P < 0.01). In contrast, IL-6, VEGF, FGF and E-selectin
showed significant decreases after early infliximab infusions. PASI was not
correlated with TNF-alpha in the serum but was significantly correlated with FGF,
VEGF and MMP-2. Treatment was well tolerated and there were no significant
adverse events in most patients, other than an urticarial reaction and an
autoimmune hepatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Monotherapy with infliximab has to be considered an efficacious and 
safe treatment for PsA in comparison with traditional disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs. The resolution of cutaneous and synovial symptoms is not
related to TNF-alpha serum levels in the initial phases. Apoptosis may play an
important role in the modulation of the inflammatory response.

PMID: 16120138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Clin Rheumatol. 1994 Jun;13(2):209-16.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with auranofin and gold sodium thiomalate.

Brückle W(1), Dexel T, Grasedyck K, Schattenkirchner M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheuma-Einheit der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.

Forty-two patients with psoriatic arthritis were included in a multicenter,
double-blind trial comparing auranofin and gold sodium thiomalate (GST) for 6
months, followed by a 6-month open treatment. Fifty-two percent of the patients
on auranofin and 33% on GST were able to complete the 1-year course of therapy.
As a result of the study we conclude that both gold compounds are effective
agents in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis. Degree of improvement of
arthritis was better in the GST group, but the number of improved patients was
greater in the auranofin group. Two patients on auranofin were withdrawn for side
effects (one diarrhoea, one worsening of psoriasis) and 5 on GST (rash 2, total
loss of appetite 1, exacerbation of psoriasis 2). Comparing the side effects of
both compounds, auranofin is less likely to aggravate the psoriatic condition or 
result in withdrawal of patients for adverse reactions.

PMID: 8088061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Reumatologia. 1968;6(2):111-9.

[Results of treatment with endoxan of psoriatic arthropathy and of chronic
progressive arthritis].

[Article in Polish]

Maldyk H, Chwalińska-Sadowska H.

PMID: 4875487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Feb;56(2):476-88.

Adalimumab for long-term treatment of psoriatic arthritis: forty-eight week data 
from the adalimumab effectiveness in psoriatic arthritis trial.

Gladman DD(1), Mease PJ, Ritchlin CT, Choy EH, Sharp JT, Ory PA, Perdok RJ, Sasso
EH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto, and Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of treatment with adalimumab, a
fully human anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) monoclonal antibody, over 48
weeks in patients with moderate to severe psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients who completed the Adalimumab Effectiveness in Psoriatic
Arthritis Trial (ADEPT), a 24-week, double-blind study of adalimumab versus
placebo in PsA, could elect to receive open-label adalimumab, 40 mg
subcutaneously every other week after week 24. Radiographs were obtained at week 
48 and were read with radiographs obtained previously. Clinical and radiographic 
efficacy data were analyzed overall and in patient subsets. Safety data were
collected over 48 weeks.
RESULTS: At week 48, patients from the adalimumab arm of ADEPT (n = 151) had
achieved American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement (ACR20), ACR50, and
ACR70 response rates of 56%, 44%, and 30%, respectively. Among those evaluated
with the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) (n = 69), PASI50, PASI75,
PASI90, and PASI100 response rates (> or =50%, > or =75%, > or =90%, and 100%
reduction in PASI scores, respectively) were 67%, 58%, 46%, and 33%, respectively
(ACR and PASI response rates were analyzed using nonresponder imputation).
Improvements in disability, as measured by the Disability Index of the Health
Assessment Questionnaire (mean change in score -0.4) were sustained from week 24 
to week 48. At week 24 and week 48, the mean changes from baseline in the
modified total Sharp score were -0.1 and 0.1, respectively, for patients who
received adalimumab for 48 weeks (n = 133), and 0.9 and 1.0, respectively, for
patients who received placebo for 24 weeks followed by adalimumab for 24 weeks (n
= 141). Adalimumab demonstrated clinical and radiographic efficacy regardless of 
whether patients were receiving methotrexate (MTX) at baseline. Adalimumab was
generally safe and well tolerated through week 48.
CONCLUSION: Adalimumab improved joint and skin manifestations, reduced
disability, and inhibited radiographic progression over 48 weeks in patients with
PsA who were participants in ADEPT. MTX use at baseline was not required for
clinical or radiographic efficacy. Adalimumab had a good safety profile through
week 48.

PMID: 17265483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Br J Nurs. 2010 Jan 14-27;19(1):42-6.

EROMIA in inflammatory arthritis: the next step in standard practice.

Palmer D(1), El Miedany Y.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Department, Darent Valley Hospital, Kent.

Patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) have been increasingly recognized as
important tools in rheumatoid arthritis. PROMs add up to a composite score that
directly reflects changes in outcomes of immediate importance to patients on a
daily basis, such as pain, sleep, fatigue, functional impairment and quality of
life. Prospective collection of the patients' information in databases has been
attempted, mainly in research studies. This work was carried out to assess the
possibility of systematically collecting and aggregating a focused set of
clinical data in the standard clinical practice, directly and comfortably from
the point of care and on an ongoing basis, using EROMIA software. Recording the
patients' data electronically has significantly (P<0.01) saved time in comparison
with written paper format. It also significantly (P<0.001) saved time in
retrieving patients' recorded data. In addition to the traditional disease
outcome measures, disease comorbidities such as falls and cardiovascular risks
could be recorded. Recording tender and swollen joints individually was made
possible. EROMIA offered a hospital-based integrated monitoring database that
echoes daily clinical practice. It does not require advanced computer knowledge.

PMID: 20081712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jan;69(1):206-9. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.100149.

Effect of adalimumab on joint disease: features of patients with psoriatic
arthritis detected by magnetic resonance imaging.

Anandarajah AP(1), Ory P, Salonen D, Feng C, Wong RL, Ritchlin CT.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology Research Center, Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology
Research Division, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, PO
Box 695, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. allen_anandarajah@urmc.rochester.edu

BACKGROUND: Bone marrow oedema (BMO), synovitis, effusion and joint erosion on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used as outcome measures in psoriatic
arthritis (PsA).
OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of adalimumab on BMO, synovitis, effusion and
erosions in PsA, as measured by MRI.
METHODS: Fifteen patients with active PsA (> or =3 tender and > or =3 swollen
joints) were enrolled in an open-label pilot study. Each received adalimumab
subcutaneously every other week for 24 weeks. MRI was obtained at baseline and 24
weeks.
RESULTS: MRI was available for 11 patients, pre and post-therapy. BMO and
effusion scores improved markedly after 24 weeks of adalimumab, while no
significant change was noted in erosion score. An unanticipated finding, however,
was the lack of improvement in the MRI synovitis score.
CONCLUSIONS: Improvement in BMO and unchanged erosion scores may explain the
"anti-erosive" effects of adalimumab in PsA. Persistence of BMO and synovitis on 
MRI suggests ongoing disease activity and supports the continuation of long-term 
anti-TNF therapy.

PMID: 19204015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Bone. 2003 Oct;33(4):575-81.

Effects of 4-year treatment with once-weekly clodronate on prevention of
corticosteroid-induced bone loss and fractures in patients with arthritis:
evaluation with dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry and quantitative ultrasound.

Frediani B(1), Falsetti P, Baldi F, Acciai C, Filippou G, Marcolongo R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
fredianibruno@tiscalinet.it

The aim of this placebo-controlled study was to determine whether once-weekly
clodronate could prevent osteoporosis in patients with arthritis at the start of 
corticosteroid therapy. One hundred sixty-three patients, 18 to 90 years of age, 
with rheumatoid or psoriatic arthritis, were randomly assigned to receive either 
clodronate (100 mg im/week) plus calcium and vitamin D (1000 mg and 800 UI,
respectively) or calcium and vitamin D alone. Patients had started therapy with
prednisone or its equivalent within the previous 100 days and had bone mineral
density <2.5 SD below mean young normal values at the lumbar spine or femoral
neck. The primary outcome was the difference between the two treatment groups at 
months 12, 24, 36, and 48 in the mean percentage change from baseline in the bone
mineral density of the lumbar spine, femur (neck and total), and total body.
Secondary measurements included changes in the stiffness index evaluated by
ultrasound measurements and the rate of new vertebral fractures. The bone density
and stiffness did not change significantly in the clodronate plus calcium and
vitamin D group, whereas it declined significantly in the calcium plus vitamin D 
group. The difference between treatment groups at 48 months in the mean change
from baseline was 8.78 +/- 1.4% for the lumbar spine (P < 0.01), 7.31 +/- 1.12%
for the femoral neck (P < 0.01), 7.92 +/- 1.93% for the trochanter (P < 0.01),
8.39 +/- 1.80% for total femur (P < 0.01), 6.94 +/- 1.09% for total body (P <
0.01), and 9.38 +/- 2.21% for stiffness of os calcis (P < 0.01). Depending on the
skeletal regions evaluated, 85 to 98% of patients treated with clodronate had a
densitometric change lower than the lowest significant densitometric difference. 
One hundred percent of patients treated with calcium plus vitamin D had a
densitometric decrease greater than the lowest significant difference. The
relative risk of vertebral fractures and multiple vertebral fractures in the
clodronate group compared to the calcium plus vitamin D group was 0.63
(0.35-0.98, 95% CI) and 0.25 (0.15-0.91, 95% CI), respectively. We concluded that
pulsatory administration of im clodronate once weekly is a safe therapy for
preventing corticosteroid induced osteoporosis in patients with arthritis.

PMID: 14555261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004 Jun;63(6):718-22.

A randomised placebo controlled trial of delipidated, deglycolipidated
Mycobacterium vaccae as immunotherapy for psoriatic arthritis.

Dalbeth N(1), Yeoman S, Dockerty JL, Highton J, Robinson E, Tan PL, Herman D,
McQueen FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Auckland Healthcare, Auckland, New Zealand.
n.dalbeth@ic.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that PVAC, delipidated, deglycolipidated heat 
killed Mycobacterium vaccae, is an effective and safe treatment for psoriatic
arthritis (PsA). This treatment has shown promising results in psoriasis.
METHODS: 36 patients with PsA in two centres were studied in this double blind,
placebo controlled, randomised trial. Patients were randomised to receive two
intradermal injections of 50 micro g PVAC or placebo and were followed up for 24 
weeks. The primary end point was the Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria
(PsARC), a composite measure based on changes in joint tenderness and swelling
scores and physician and patient global assessments.
RESULTS: The PsARC response at either 12 or 24 weeks was achieved by 9/18 (50%)
placebo and 9/18 (50%) PVAC patients (p = 1.0). No significant differences in the
Psoriasis Activity and Severity Index (PASI), patient or physician global
assessments, CRP, or Health Assessment Questionnaire score over time were found
between the two groups. However, changes in the pain visual analogue scale over
time did differ between the two groups (p = 0.006): at 24 weeks the mean score in
the PVAC group had declined by 19.2 mm and in the placebo group had increased by 
4.8 mm. PVAC was well tolerated with no increased incidence of adverse events
compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: PVAC was not shown to be as effective as immunotherapy for PsA. The 
striking response to placebo in this study reinforces the importance of
adequately controlling therapeutic trials in PsA.

PMCID: PMC1755035
PMID: 15140780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Rheumatol Suppl. 1985 Dec;12 Suppl 12:21-4.

Short term efficacy of methotrexate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.

Willkens RF.

Methotrexate is easily administered, widely accepted by patients, and has a rapid
therapeutic effect. With careful attention to known risk factors, such as
alcoholism, diabetes, obesity, and renal disease, it is a useful agent for the
treatment of refractory rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Although rheumatologists have 
been using methotrexate in the treatment of RA for some time, controlled studies 
have been needed to establish the safety and efficacy of this agent. This paper
will review the findings of the Cooperating Clinics of the American Rheumatism
Association, as well as other studies that have investigated the short term
efficacy of methotrexate.

PMID: 3913772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Minerva Med. 1973 Jun 23;64(47):2483-90.

[Controlled clinical research on the use of ibuprofen in rheumatoid arthritis and
other rheumatic diseases].

[Article in Italian]

Giordano M, Tirri G, Capelli L, Gallo M, Scott GG.

PMID: 4579840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Rheumatol Suppl. 1985 Dec;12 Suppl 12:35-9.

Toxicity of low dose methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis.

Weinblatt ME.

The efficacy and acceptability of low dose weekly methotrexate therapy in
rheumatoid arthritis was reviewed in 587 patients in open and randomized trials. 
Gastrointestinal toxicity was reported most frequently. Bone marrow suppression, 
stomatitis, alopecia, headaches, and fever also occurred. A review of these
adverse reactions, as well as of the effects of this drug on the reproductive,
renal, and pulmonary systems, is discussed.

PMID: 3913775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 May;69(5):934-5. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.119446. Epub 2009 Aug 
9.

Combination therapy with ciclosporin and etanercept in patients with psoriatic
arthritis.

D'Angelo S, Cutro MS, Lubrano E, Leccese P, Mennillo GA, Ferrara N, Olivieri I.

PMID: 19666936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Ann Rheum Dis. 1993 Nov;52(11):826-8.

Therapeutic value of colchicine in the treatment of patients with psoriatic
arthritis.

McKendry RJ(1), Kraag G, Seigel S, al-Awadhi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Ottawa General Hospital, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that colchicine is an effective treatment of
psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: Twenty five patients with psoriatic arthritis were entered into a two
centre, double blind, crossover study of 23 weeks' duration comparing the
therapeutic effect of colchicine (0.6-1.8 mg/day) with placebo.
RESULTS: No significant difference was noted between colchicine or placebo
treatment for the primary outcome measure (Lansbury joint count) or any of the
seven secondary outcome measures. No change in the psoriasis was noted during
active or placebo treatment. Adverse clinical effects were reported more often
during treatment with colchicine (14 patients) than with the placebo (four
patients), resulting in the early withdrawal of three patients receiving
colchicine from the trial. Increased creatine kinase values, without weakness,
occurred during treatment with colchicine (five patients) and placebo (four
patients).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our study did not provide evidence that colchicine is
of therapeutic value in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1005197
PMID: 8250615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Ter Arkh. 2007;79(8):22-8.

[Results of leflunomide treatment of psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Pchelintseva AO, Korotaeva TV, Godzenko AA, Korsakova IuL, Stanislav ML, Denisov 
LN.

AIM: To study efficacy and tolerance of leflunomide (LF) in patients with
polyarticular psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The analysis was made in 58 patients: 35 (60%) females, 23 
(40%) males. Mean age of the patients was 44.9 +/- 10.8 years, PsA duration--9.7 
+/- 7.5 years. LF was given by a standard scheme: 100 mg/day for 3 days then 20
mg/day for 6 months. PsA activity was assessed by the number of painful and
inflamed joints, pain intensity, VAS, Likert quastionnaire data. Functional
status of the patients was estimated according to Health Assessment
Questionnaire. Skin syndrome was rated by pruritus scale, 5-score Likert scale
and PASI (psoriasis Area and Severity Index). PASI was applied in patients with
affected area 3% at least. Quality of life was assessed by Dermatology Life
Quality Index. Basic criterion of the treatment efficacy was response by PsARC
(Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criteria). The additional evaluation was made of
the number of patients with improvement by criteria ACR 20, ACR 50 and ACR 75 as 
well as those with 50 and 75% response by PASI (PASI 50 and PASI 75).
RESULTS: To the end of the treatment the number of painful and inflamed joints
decreased significantly (p < 0.001) as well as pain, VAS and Likert scores. To
the treatment month 6 HAQ index diminished by 36%. According to PsARC, of 58
patients 36 (62%) patients responded. Improvement by ACR 20 was observed in 34
(59%) of 58 patients. PASI changes were not significant (p = 0. 144). DLQI
diminished by 36% (p = 0.028). As shown by acute phase indices, LF had no effect 
on ESR (p = 0.45). CRP fell significantly to treatment month 3 (p < or = 0.001)
and further changes were insignificant. LF tolerance was satisfactory. Ten
patients (17%) withdrew because of side effects which were standard. Severe
myelo- and hepatotoxicity were absent.
CONCLUSION: LF is highly effective in therapy of polyarticular PsA and has
satisfactory tolerance. Perspectives of further use of LF in combined treatment
of PsA are associated with its potential to inhibit the disease progression.

PMID: 17926466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Rheumatol. 2007 May;34(5):1040-50. Epub 2007 Apr 15.

Safety and efficacy of adalimumab in treatment of patients with psoriatic
arthritis who had failed disease modifying antirheumatic drug therapy.

Genovese MC(1), Mease PJ, Thomson GT, Kivitz AJ, Perdok RJ, Weinberg MA, Medich
J, Sasso EH; M02-570 Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University Medical Center,
Palo Alto, California 94304, USA. genovese@stanford.edu

Erratum in
    J Rheumatol. 2007 Jun;34(6):1439.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the safety and efficacy of adalimumab for the treatment
of active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in patients with an inadequate response to
disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD).
METHODS: In a placebo controlled, double-blind, randomized, multicenter study,
patients were treated for 12 weeks with subcutaneous injections of adalimumab 40 
mg every other week (eow) or placebo, followed by a period of open-label
treatment with adalimumab 40 mg eow. The primary efficacy endpoint was the
percentage of patients who met the American College of Rheumatology (ACR20) core 
criteria at Week 12. Secondary efficacy measures included the modified Psoriatic 
Arthritis Response Criteria (PsARC) and assessments of disability, psoriatic
lesions, and quality of life. For missing data, nonresponder imputation was used 
for ACR and PsARC scores and last observation carried forward for other measures.
RESULTS: A total of 100 patients received study drug (51 adalimumab, 49 placebo).
At Week 12, an ACR20 response was achieved by 39% of adalimumab patients versus
16% of placebo patients (p = 0.012), and a PsARC response was achieved by 51%
with adalimumab versus 24% with placebo (p = 0.007). At Week 12, measures of skin
lesions and disability were statistically significantly improved with adalimumab.
After Week 12, open-label adalimumab provided continued improvement for
adalimumab patients and initiated rapid improvement for placebo patients, with
ACR20 response rates of 65% and 57%, respectively, observed at Week 24. Serious
adverse events had similar frequencies during therapy with placebo (4.1%),
blinded adalimumab (2.0%), and open-label adalimumab (3.1%). No serious
infections occurred during adalimumab therapy.
CONCLUSION: In this study of patients who had active PsA and a previous,
inadequate response to DMARD therapy, adalimumab was well tolerated and
significantly reduced the signs, symptoms, and disability of PsA during 12 weeks 
of blinded and 12 weeks of open-label therapy. Adalimumab also improved psoriasis
in these patients.

PMID: 17444593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2001;19(1 Suppl 22):S17-20.

The role of NSAIDs in psoriatic arthritis: evidence from a controlled study with 
nimesulide.

Sarzi-Puttini P(1), Santandrea S, Boccassini L, Panni B, Caruso I.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital L. Sacco, Rheumatology Unit, Department of Internal
Medicine, Via G.B. Grassi 74, 20157 Milan, Italy. Sarzi@tiscalinet.it

OBJECTIVE: To define the optimal dose of nimesulide (NIM) for treating psoriatic 
arthritis.
METHODS: Eighty patients entered a 4-week, double-dummy, randomised, controlled
study. Each patient was allocated to one of the following treatment groups: NIM
100 mg/day, NIM 200 mg/day, NIM 400 mg/day, or placebo. Primary end points for
arthritis assessment were the scores for tender and swollen joints, and the
physician's and patient's global assessment of efficacy.
RESULTS: 76/80 patients completed the study. NIM decreased the score for tender
and swollen joints from baseline to the end swollen joints from baseline to the
end of therapy (p < 0.05). Pain severity on a visual analogue scale (VAS) was
reduced by NIM 200 mg (p = 0.03) or NIM 400 mg (p = 0.019) compared to placebo,
as was morning stiffness (p = 0.038 and p = 0.008, respectively), but the trends 
with 100 mg were not statistically significant. The investigators and patients
assessed the global efficacy of the NIM 200 and 400 mg/day groups as better than 
placebo or NIM 100 mg. Side effects were observed in 12 patients (15%) during
treatment. They were mostly mild, only one patient withdrew from the study as a
result, and the trend for a higher incidence with NIM was not statistically
significant. The Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI) and the ESR did not show
any significant changes. Patients in the placebo group took more paracetamol per 
day compared with those in the NIM groups (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Nimesulide 200 and 400 mg/day are effective and safe in psoriatic
arthritis.

PMID: 11296544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013 Jul-Aug;31(4):526-31. Epub 2013 May 28.

Lumbar interspinous bursitis in active polymyalgia rheumatica.

Salvarani C(1), Barozzi L, Boiardi L, Pipitone N, Bajocchi GL, Macchioni PL,
Catanoso M, Pazzola G, Valentino M, De Luca C, Hunder GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico, Reggio Emilia, Italy. salvarani.carlo@asmn.re.it

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the inflammatory involvement of lumbar interspinous
bursae in patients with polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR) using magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI).
METHODS: Ten consecutive, untreated new patients with PMR and pain in the
shoulder and pelvic girdles were investigated. Seven patients with
spondyloarthritis (4 with psoriatic spondyloarthrits, one with entheropatic
spondyloarthritis, and 2 with ankylosing spondylitis) as well as 2 patients with 
spinal osteoarthritis and 2 patients with rheumatoid arthritis with lumbar pain
served as controls. MRI of lumbar spine was performed in all PMR patients and
controls. Nine patients (5 PMR patients and 4 controls) also had MRI of the
thoracic spine.
RESULTS: MRI evidence of interspinous lumbar bursitis was found in 9/10 patients 
with PMR and in 5/11 controls. A moderate to marked (grade ≥2 on a
semiquantitative 0-3 scale) lumbar bursitis occurred significantly more
frequently in patients with PMR than in control patients (60% vs. 9%, p=0.020).
In most of the patients and controls lumbar bursitis was found at the L3-L5
interspaces. Only 2 patients had bursitis at a different level (one patient had
widespread lumbar bursitis, and one control at L2-L4). No interspinous bursitis
was demonstrated by MRI of the thoracic spine in patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Inflammation of lumbar bursae may be responsible for the low back
pain reported by patients with PMR. The prominent inflammatory involvement of
bursae including those of the lumbar spine supports the hypothesis that PMR may
be a disorder affecting predominantly extra-articular synovial structures.

PMID: 23739147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Cutan Med Surg. 2007 Mar-Apr;11(2):57-66.

Efalizumab for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

Papp KA(1), Caro I, Leung HM, Garovoy M, Mease PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Probity Medical Research, Waterloo, ON, Canada. kapapp@probitymedical.com

BACKGROUND: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory arthritis associated
with psoriasis. Efalizumab, a T cell-targeted, recombinant human monoclonal
antibody, is approved for the treatment of adult patients with chronic moderate
to severe plaque psoriasis. The effect of efalizumab therapy on PsA has not
previously been investigated.
OBJECTIVE: This phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter
study evaluated the efficacy and safety of efalizumab for the treatment of PsA.
METHODS: Patients were required to be on at least one of the following
concomitant systemic therapies for PsA: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
corticosteroids, and/or sulfasalazine or methotrexate. One hundred fifteen
patients with active PsA were enrolled and randomized in the study. Of these, 107
were treated weekly with efalizumab 1 mg/kg or placebo for 12 weeks, followed by 
12 additional weeks of open-label efalizumab.
RESULTS: At week 12, 28% of efalizumab-treated patients achieved ACR-20 response 
(a 20% reduction from the baseline in the American College of Rheumatology
response criteria), the primary end point, compared with 19% of placebo patients 
(p = .27). The safety profile was comparable between efalizumab- and
placebo-treated patient groups, regardless of methotrexate background therapy,
and no worsening of joint disease occurred with efalizumab therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Efalizumab was not effective in treating PsA; efalizumab therapy did
not worsen PsA. The efalizumab safety profile does not appear to be altered with 
the concomitant use of methotrexate therapy.

PMID: 17374316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Verh Dtsch Ges Rheumatol. 1972;2:Suppl 2:415-8.

[Clinical experiences in the therapy of rheumatoid arthritis using
isophosphamide].

[Article in German]

Miehlke K, Kafarnik U.

PMID: 4559449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Rheumatol. 2008 May;35(5):869-76. Epub 2008 Mar 15.

Two-year efficacy and safety of infliximab treatment in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis: findings of the Infliximab Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis
Controlled Trial (IMPACT).

Antoni CE(1), Kavanaugh A, van der Heijde D, Beutler A, Keenan G, Zhou B, Kirkham
B, Tutuncu Z, Burmester GR, Schneider U, Furst DE, Molitor J, Keystone E, Gladman
DD, Manger B, Wassenberg S, Weier R, Wallace DJ, Weisman MH, Kalden JR, Smolen
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology, Schering-Plough Corporation, Kenilworth, New Jersey
07033-0530, USA. christian.antoni@spcorp.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate longterm efficacy/safety of infliximab over 2 years in 
patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Initially, 104 patients were randomized to receive blinded infusions of 
infliximab 5 mg/kg or placebo at Weeks 0, 2, 6, and 14. At Week 16, all patients 
received infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks through Week 46. Seventy-eight of the
87 patients completing the first year continued into the open-label longterm
extension and received infliximab 5 mg/kg at Weeks 54, 62, 70, 78, 86, and 94.
The primary efficacy endpoint for the study extension was the proportion of
patients with at least 20% improvement in the American College of Rheumatology
response criteria (ACR20) at Week 98. Radiographic progression was assessed by
the PsA-modified van der Heijde-Sharp score in patients with radiographs
available at baseline and Week 98 (n = 43).
RESULTS: At Week 98, 62% (48/78) of infliximab-treated patients achieved an ACR20
response; 45% (35/78) and 35% (27/78) of patients achieved ACR50 and ACR70
responses, respectively. Among patients with baseline Psoriasis Area and Severity
Index scores >or= 2.5, 64% (16/25) achieved > 75% improvement from baseline to
Week 98. The average estimated annual radiographic progression with infliximab
treatment was significantly reduced versus the estimated baseline rate of
progression. No new safety issues were observed during the second year of the
study.
CONCLUSION: Therapy with infliximab 5 mg/kg through Week 94 produced sustained
improvement in joint and skin symptoms, inhibited radiographic progression, and
continued to exhibit a favorable benefit-risk ratio in this population with
treatment-refractory PsA.

PMID: 18381786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Apr;65(4):471-7. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

Infliximab improves health related quality of life and physical function in
patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Kavanaugh A(1), Antoni C, Krueger GG, Yan S, Bala M, Dooley LT, Beutler A, Guzzo 
C, Gladman D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovative Therapy, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and
Immunology, University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0943, USA. akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of infliximab on health related quality of
life (HRQoL) and physical function in patients with active psoriatic arthritis
(PsA) in the IMPACT 2 trial.
METHODS: 200 patients with PsA unresponsive to conventional treatment were
randomised to intravenous infusions of infliximab 5 mg/kg or placebo at weeks 0, 
2, 6, 14, and 22; patients with inadequate response entered early escape at week 
16. HRQoL was assessed using the Short Form-36 (SF-36) at weeks 0, 14, and 24.
Functional disability was assessed using the Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ) at every visit through week 24. Associations between changes in quality of 
life (SF-36) and articular (American College of Rheumatology (ACR)) and
dermatological (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI)) responses were
examined.
RESULTS: Mean percentage improvement from baseline in HAQ was 48.6% in the
infliximab group compared with worsening of 18.4% in the placebo group at week 14
(p < 0.001). Furthermore, 58.6% and 19.4% of infliximab and placebo treated
patients, respectively, achieved a clinically meaningful improvement in HAQ (that
is, > or = 0.3 unit decrease) at week 14 (p < 0.001). Increases in physical and
mental component summary (PCS and MCS) scores and all eight scales of the SF-36
in the infliximab group were greater than those in the placebo group at week 14
(p < or = 0.001). These benefits were sustained through week 24. Patients
achieving ACR20 and PASI75 responses had the greatest improvements in PCS and MCS
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with PsA, infliximab 5 mg/kg significantly improved
HRQoL and physical function compared with placebo through 24 weeks.

PMCID: PMC1798094
PMID: 16096330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2005 Jan;44(1):126-9. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

Treatment of active psoriatic arthritis with the PPARgamma ligand pioglitazone:
an open-label pilot study.

Bongartz T(1), Coras B, Vogt T, Schölmerich J, Müller-Ladner U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Regensburg, Germany.
bongartz.tim@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVES: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory joint disease, in which 
early neovascularization of affected skin and synovial tissue represents an
important pathogenetic step in the disease process. Activation of the peroxisome 
proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) showed anti-inflammatory
effects in several in vitro and in vivo models (e.g. collagen-induced arthritis) 
by inhibition of angiogenesis and suppression of proinflammatory cytokines.
Therefore, we studied the use of pioglitazone, a PPARgamma agonist originally
developed for the treatment of diabetes, in patients with PsA.
METHODS: Ten patients with active PsA, seven males and three females, who showed 
at least two tender and two swollen joints despite stable treatment with an
NSAID, were enrolled in this open-label study. All patients received a daily dose
of 60 mg pioglitazone while continuing their current NSAID therapy. The primary
endpoint was the PsARC (Psoriatic Arthritis Response Criterion); the secondary
endpoints included the ACR20 response and improvement in the Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index (PASI) in patients with more than 2% skin involvement. Patients
were evaluated for endpoints at baseline and after 12 weeks.
RESULTS: After 12 weeks, six of 10 patients met the PsARC. The ACR20 response was
achieved in five patients. The mean percentage reduction in PASI was 38%, with a 
clinically meaningful PASI 50 response in two of six patients. Median tender
joint count (interquartile range) decreased from 12.0 (8.0-18.0) to 4.0
(2.0-10.0), and the median swollen joint count from 5.0 (4.0-8.0) to 2.0
(1.0-7.0) (P<0.05 for both). Median Health Assessment Questionnaire score changed
from 1.0 (0.375-1.375) to 0.75 (0.375-1.0) (P<0.05). Three patients had to be
withdrawn from the study due to inefficacy and side-effects. Major side-effects
were oedema of the lower extremities and increase in weight.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with a PPARgamma agonist appears to be a promising
therapeutic principle in PsA, but the use of PPARgamma ligands might be limited
by side-effects such as increase in weight and fluid retention.

PMID: 15479756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Mar;56(3):831-9.

Effects of tumor necrosis factor blockade on cardiovascular risk factors in
psoriatic arthritis: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Sattar N(1), Crompton P, Cherry L, Kane D, Lowe G, McInnes IB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. nsattar@clinmed.gla.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To conduct a robust, double-blind, placebo-controlled study examining 
the effects of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) modulation on concentrations of
traditional and novel cardiovascular disease risk factors in patients with an
inflammatory condition.
METHODS: In this double-blind study, 127 patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 
and active psoriasis were randomized to 1 of 3 treatment arms (placebo, onercept 
50 mg, or onercept 100 mg for 12 weeks). Traditional and novel biochemical risk
factors were evaluated at baseline and at the end of the treatment period.
RESULTS: At baseline, an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level correlated
positively with lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]), intercellular adhesion molecule 1,
interleukin-6, and homocysteine levels but was inversely correlated with
concentrations of all other lipid moieties and sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG). Onercept at a dose of 100 mg induced significant (P < or = 0.002)
reductions in the levels of CRP (-14.0 versus 6.5 mg/liter with placebo), Lp(a)
(-3.11 versus 1.52 mg/dl with placebo), and homocysteine (-1.72 versus 0.34
mumoles/liter with placebo) and an increase in the SHBG concentration (4.3 versus
-1.3 mmoles/liter with placebo). The 100-mg dose of onercept was also associated 
with significant (P < 0.05) increases in the level of circulating apolipoprotein 
AI (Apo A-I) (4.0 versus -5.6 mg/dl with placebo); however, levels of Apo B (6.3 
versus -0.4 mg/dl with placebo) and triglycerides (0.09 versus 0.04 mmoles/liter)
were also increased.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to demonstrate that targeting the TNF pathway
can significantly decrease Lp(a) and homocysteine levels and elevate Apo A-I and 
SHBG concentrations. These data support an important precursor role for
high-grade inflammation in modulating these putative risk parameters. However,
TNF blockade-induced increases in triglyceride and Apo B levels were unexpected
and suggest that it is not possible, on the basis of biochemical changes in
isolation, to suggest that cardioprotection would necessarily follow; rather,
direct measures of atherosclerotic progression with TNF blockade (e.g., using
carotid ultrasound) would be better.

PMID: 17328057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Aug;68(8):1303-9. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.091389. Epub 2008 Jul
22.

A prospective, randomised, placebo-controlled study to identify biomarkers
associated with active treatment in psoriatic arthritis: effects of adalimumab
treatment on synovial tissue.

van Kuijk AW(1), Gerlag DM, Vos K, Wolbink G, de Groot M, de Rie MA, Zwinderman
AH, Dijkmans BA, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To determine which of the changes in synovial tissue correlates best
with clinical response associated with effective therapy (adalimumab) to
facilitate the planning of future studies with therapeutic agents for psoriatic
arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: A total of 24 patients with active PsA were randomised to receive
adalimumab (n = 12) or placebo (n = 12) for 4 weeks. Synovial biopsies were
obtained before and after 4 weeks of treatment. Immunohistochemical analysis was 
performed to characterise the cell infiltrate, expression of cytokines and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and vascularity. Sections were analysed by digital
image analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using covariance analysis.
RESULTS: The mean Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28) after 4 weeks was
1.92 units lower (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.07 to 2.77) after adalimumab
therapy compared with placebo. Paired pretreatment and post-treatment synovial
samples were available from 19 patients. Many cell types were reduced after
adalimumab treatment compared to placebo. After applying a ranked analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) model to correct for baseline imbalances, a significant
effect of treatment was observed on CD3-positive cells: there was a median
reduction of 248 cells/mm(2) after adalimumab versus placebo treatment (p =
0.035). In addition, the expression of MMP13 was significantly reduced after
active treatment: the integrated optical density (IOD)/mm(2) was 18 190 lower
after adalimumab treatment as compared to placebo (p = 0.033).
CONCLUSION: Adalimumab therapy in PsA is associated with a marked reduction in T 
cell infiltration and MMP13 expression in synovial tissue, suggesting that these 
parameters could be used as biomarkers that are sensitive to change after active 
treatment in small proof of concept studies in PsA.

PMCID: PMC2703703
PMID: 18647851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Rheumatol. 2004 Oct;31(10):1973-80.

Doxycycline versus doxycycline and rifampin in undifferentiated
spondyloarthropathy, with special reference to chlamydia-induced arthritis. A
prospective, randomized 9-month comparison.

Carter JD(1), Valeriano J, Vasey FB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612,
USA. jocarter@hsc.usf.edu

OBJECTIVE: Chlamydia is a known trigger of reactive arthritis (ReA). It may also 
be common cause of undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy (uSpA). Persistent,
metabolically active, Chlamydiae have been observed in the synovial tissue of
these patients years after their initial exposure. Trials with lymecycline and
rifampin have shown benefit in early/acute Chlamydia-induced arthritis. In vitro 
data suggest that persistent Chlamydia become resistant to chronic monotherapy of
tetracyclines or rifampin, whereas no such resistance is noted when rifampin is
added to antimicrobials that are active against Chlamydia. Rifampin and
doxycycline also show synergistic effect against Chlamydia. In addition, rifampin
inhibits chlamydial production of heat shock proteins (HSP). HSP60 plays a key
role in the chronic persistent state of Chlamydia. We conducted a prospective,
randomized 9-month trial to evaluate the efficacy of doxycycline versus a
combination of doxycycline and rifampin in the treatment of uSpA.
METHODS: The study enrolled 30 patients with chronic inflammatory arthritis
(average disease duration 10 yrs) who fulfilled the European Spondylarthropathy
Study Group criteria, with no evidence of inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, or preceding dysentery. Patients received doxycycline 100
mg po twice daily or a combination of doxycycline 100 mg po twice daily and
rifampin 600 mg po daily. They received a 4-question self-questionnaire and a
blinded joint examination at each visit. The questions include a visual analog
scale (VAS) for their current amount of back pain, duration of morning stiffness,
back pain at night, and peripheral joint pain. The blinded joint examination
consisted of a swollen joint count (SJC) and a tender joint count (TJC). These 6 
variables were assessed at baseline and at 1, 3, 6, and 9 months. Responders were
defined as those who improved > or = 20% in at least 4 of the 6 variables at 9
months of therapy.
RESULTS: Comparing the doxycycline + rifampin arm (D/R) versus the doxycycline
arm (D) at 9 months of therapy, all 6 variables improved more in D/R versus D, 4 
of which were statistically significant. The mean VAS (scale of 100) decreased
24.4 points in D/R in contrast to 3 points in D (p < 0.03). Duration of morning
stiffness decreased by 1.2 h in D/R, with a slight increase of 0.1 h in D (p <
0.003). The back pain at night and peripheral joint pain both improved in D/R
group versus D (not statistically significant). Finally, the SJC and TJC also
improved in D/R (-2.1 and -2.5) versus D (-0.4 and -0.6; p = 0.02, p = 0.03,
respectively). Eleven of 15 patients in the D/R arm were responders, whereas only
2 of 15 D group patients were considered responders (p < 0.003).
CONCLUSION: The combination of doxycycline and rifampin for 9 months seemed to be
effective in treatment of chronic uSpA. This is the first study to demonstrate
therapeutic benefit with antimicrobials to a chronic inflammatory arthritis
possibly secondary to persistent Chlamydia.

PMID: 15468362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Dec;52(12):3801-12.

Discovery of new rheumatoid arthritis biomarkers using the surface-enhanced laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry ProteinChip approach.

de Seny D(1), Fillet M, Meuwis MA, Geurts P, Lutteri L, Ribbens C, Bours V,
Wehenkel L, Piette J, Malaise M, Merville MP.

Author information: 
(1)University of Liège, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Liege, Belgium.
ddeseny@chu.ulg.ac.be

OBJECTIVE: To identify serum protein biomarkers specific for rheumatoid arthritis
(RA), using surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (SELDI-TOF-MS) technology.
METHODS: A total of 103 serum samples from patients and healthy controls were
analyzed. Thirty-four of the patients had a diagnosis of RA, based on the
American College of Rheumatology criteria. The inflammation control group
comprised 20 patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA), 9 with asthma, and 10 with 
Crohn's disease. The noninflammation control group comprised 14 patients with
knee osteoarthritis and 16 healthy control subjects. Serum protein profiles were 
obtained by SELDI-TOF-MS and compared in order to identify new biomarkers
specific for RA. Data were analyzed by a machine learning algorithm called
decision tree boosting, according to different preprocessing steps.
RESULTS: The most discriminative mass/charge (m/z) values serving as potential
biomarkers for RA were identified on arrays for both patients with RA versus
controls and patients with RA versus patients with PsA. From among several
candidates, the following peaks were highlighted: m/z values of 2,924 (RA versus 
controls on H4 arrays), 10,832 and 11,632 (RA versus controls on CM10 arrays),
4,824 (RA versus PsA on H4 arrays), and 4,666 (RA versus PsA on CM10 arrays).
Positive results of proteomic analysis were associated with positive results of
the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide test. Our observations suggested that the
10,832 peak could represent myeloid-related protein 8.
CONCLUSION: SELDI-TOF-MS technology allows rapid analysis of many serum samples, 
and use of decision tree boosting analysis as the main statistical method allowed
us to propose a pattern of protein peaks specific for RA.

PMID: 16320331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2004 Feb;50(2):242-6.

Treatment of psoriatic arthritis with granulocyte and monocyte adsorption
apheresis.

Kanekura T(1), Kawabata H, Maruyama I, Kanzaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Faculty of Medicine, Kogoshima, Japan.
takurok@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Granulocyte and monocyte adsorption apheresis (GCAP) is a new extracorporeal
apheresis treatment modality that removes pathogenic granulocytes. Recently, we
found that GCAP is useful for treating pyoderma gangrenosum and pustular
psoriasis. We thought that this treatment may also be effective for treating
other disorders attributable to activated granulocytes and studied the efficacy
of GCAP in 4 patients with psoriatic arthritis. Treatment with GCAP resulted in
remarkable clearing of joint pain, suggesting that GCAP is valuable for treating 
arthritis as well as skin disorders. We present a detailed description of these
patients and this novel therapy.

PMID: 14726879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Rheumatol. 2001 Oct;28(10):2274-82.

A comparison of cyclosporine, sulfasalazine, and symptomatic therapy in the
treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

Salvarani C(1), Macchioni P, Olivieri I, Marchesoni A, Cutolo M, Ferraccioli G,
Cantini F, Salaffi F, Padula A, Lovino C, Dovigo L, Bordin G, Davoli C, Pasero G,
Alberighi OD.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Service, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
salvarani.carlo@asmn.re.it

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and tolerability of cyclosporine (CSA) with
that of symptomatic therapy (ST) alone and sulfasalazine (SSZ) in the treatment
of psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Twelve rheumatology centers recruited 99 patients with active PsA in a
24 week, prospective, randomized, open, controlled study. The patients were
treated with CSA (3 mg/kg/day) or SSZ (2,000 mg/day) plus ST, or ST alone
(nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, analgesics, and/or prednisone < or = 5
mg/day). The primary endpoint was the 6 month change in pain. Analyses were on
the basis of the intention-to-treat principle.
RESULTS: In comparison with both SSZ and ST, there was a statistically
significant difference in favor of CSA in terms of the mean changes in the pain
score (p < 0.05), which was considered the primary response variable. A
significant decrease in favor of CSA versus ST alone was also observed for
swollen joint count (p = 0.05), tender joint count (p = 0.01), joint/pain
tenderness score (p = 0.002), patient and physician global assessment by at least
one point (p = 0.04 and 0.01, respectively), total Arthritis Impact Measurement
Scale score (p = 0.002), and spondylitis functional index (p = 0.002). There was 
a statistically significant difference in the ACR 50% and ACR 70% response rates 
between the CSA and ST groups (p = 0.02, 0.05). Comparing the SSZ and ST alone
groups, only the spondylitis functional index decreased significantly in the SSZ 
treated patients (p = 0.03). The Psoriasis Area and Severity Index was
significantly lower in the CSA than in the ST and SSZ groups (p = 0.0001 and
0.01, respectively). Decrease in erythrocyte sedimentation rate was significant
only in the SSZ versus the ST group (p = 0.02), whereas reduction in C-reactive
protein was significant in the CSA treated patients compared with the ST group (p
= 0.006). The most common adverse event in the CSA group was mild, reversible
kidney dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: The results of this open trial confirm that CSA is well tolerated by 
patients with PsA and suggest that it is more efficacious than ST or SSZ.

PMID: 11669169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Rheumatol Int. 2000;19(3):77-82.

Immediate and delayed effects of treatment at the Dead Sea in patients with
psoriatic arthritis.

Elkayam O(1), Ophir J, Brener S, Paran D, Wigler I, Efron D, Even-Paz Z, Politi
Y, Yaron M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tel Aviv, Ichilov Hospital, Israel.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the immediate and delayed effects of
balneotherapy at the Dead Sea on patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA). A total
of 42 patients with PsA were treated at the Dead Sea for 4 weeks. Patients were
randomly allocated into two groups: group 1 (23 patients) and group 2 (19
patients). Both groups received daily exposure to sun ultraviolet rays and
regular bathing at the Dead Sea. Group 1 was also treated with mud packs and
sulfur baths. Patients were assessed by a dermatologist and a rheumatologist 3
days before arrival, at the end of treatment, and at weeks 8, 16, and 28 from the
start of treatment. The clinical indices assessed were morning stiffness, right
and left hand grip, number of tender joints, number of swollen joints, Schober
test, distance from finger to floor when bending forward, patient's
self-assessment of disease severity, inflammatory neck and back pain and
psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) score. Comparison between groups
disclosed a similar statistically significant improvement for variables such as
PASI, morning stiffness, patient self-assessment, right and left grip, Schober
test and distance from finger to floor when bending forward. For variables such
as tender and swollen joints, and inflammatory neck and back pain, improvement
over time was statistically significant in group 1. Addition of mud packs and
sulfur baths to sun ultraviolet exposure and Dead Sea baths seems to prolong
beneficial effects and improves inflammatory back pain.

PMID: 10776684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Ter Arkh. 1994;66(5):75-7.

[The efficacy of diclonate P in psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Burdeĭnyĭ AP.

Ten patients with significant psoriatic arthritis (PA) were placed under
observation for the efficacy of diclonate P (sodium diclofenac) manufactured by
Pliva Company (Croatia), administered in the daily dose 200 mg. Diclonate P was
demonstrated to produce a high clinical effect. Nine patients preferred it to
other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs taken before (ortophen, metindol,
flugalin). Out of 12 subjective and objective characteristics used for estimation
of the drug efficacy, 10 improved, while 7 of them improved significantly.
Transient gastralgias were only recorded in one female patient. It is concluded
that diclonate P possesses a significant antiinflammatory and analgesic efficacy 
in PA and has a beneficial effect on the articular syndrome and spinal symptoms. 
It is tolerated well and has no adverse action on psoriasis.

PMID: 7940348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Drugs Dermatol. 2007 Mar;6(3):299-306.

Reductions in healthcare resource utilization in psoriatic arthritis patients
receiving etanercept therapy: results from the educate trial.

Kimball AB(1), Jackson JM, Sobell JM, Boh EE, Grekin S, Pharmd EB, Woolley JM,
Xia HA, Chiou CF, Stevens SR.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General and Brigham and Women's Hospitals, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. harvardskinstudies@partners.org

The Experience Diagnosing, Understanding Care, and Treatment with Enbrel
(EDUCATE) trial is a phase IV, 24-week, multicenter, open-label study of
etanercept 50 mg weekly in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in
community dermatology clinics. In this study, patients with active PsA and
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis have measurable uses of healthcare resources 
at baseline, reflecting a burden of illness. Etanercept significantly reduced
healthcare resource utilization, absenteeism, and caregiver assistance in PsA
patients after 24 weeks of treatment. These results could translate into savings 
on both direct and indirect costs and improvements in health-related quality of
life for patients with PsA.

PMID: 17373192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Rheumatol Int. 2006 Aug;26(10):904-7. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Analgesic and disease modifying effects of interferential current in psoriatic
arthritis.

Walker UA(1), Uhl M, Weiner SM, Warnatz K, Lange-Nolde A, Dertinger H, Peter HH, 
Jurenz SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Albert-Ludwigs University,
Medizinische Universitätsklinik, Hugstetterstr. 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
ulrich.walker@klinikum.uni-freiburg.de

Interferential current (IFC) was suggested to improve the skin manifestations of 
psoriasis vulgaris, possibly by enhancing the intracellular concentration of
cyclic AMP. We assessed the efficacy of IFC on psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Nine
consecutive patients were analyzed at baseline and after 16 weeks of IFC therapy.
Bipolar IFC was applied twice daily to hands, feet plus all affected joints. IFC 
improved SF-36 assessed body pain, but not other SF-36 subscales. Morning
stiffness, tender joint counts, and physician assessed disease activity improved.
In contrast, visual analogue scale assessed pain, CRP and ESR measurements were
unchanged. MRI of the most affected hand or foot documented a tendency towards
worsened tendinitis, soft tissue swelling, and new joint space narrowing and
erosions. Bone scintigraphy showed a trend towards deterioration. New joints
became inflamed within treated sites. Thus IFC has analgesic effects in PsA, but 
does not have a satisfactory disease modifying effect.

PMID: 16432686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Jun;64(6):859-64. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled, multicentre trial of combination 
therapy with methotrexate plus ciclosporin in patients with active psoriatic
arthritis.

Fraser AD(1), van Kuijk AW, Westhovens R, Karim Z, Wakefield R, Gerards AH,
Landewé R, Steinfeld SD, Emery P, Dijkmans BA, Veale DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Research Unit, Old Nurses Home, Great Georges 
Street, Leeds, West Yorkshire LS1 3EX, UK. drsandyfraser@aol.com

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of adding ciclosporin A (CSA) to 
the treatment of patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) demonstrating an
incomplete response to methotrexate (MTX) monotherapy.
METHODS: In a 12 month, randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial at
five centres in three countries, 72 patients with active PsA with an incomplete
response to MTX were randomised to receive either CSA (n = 38) or placebo (n =
34). Patients underwent full clinical and radiological assessment and, in
addition, high resolution ultrasound (HRUS) was performed at one centre. An
intention to treat (last observation carried forward) analysis was employed.
RESULTS: Some significant improvements were noted at 12 months in both groups.
However, in the active but not the placebo arm there were significant
improvements in swollen joint count, mean (SD), from 11.7 (9.7) to 6.7 (6.5)
(p<0.001) and C reactive protein, from 17.4 (14.5) to 12.7 (14.3) mg/l (p<0.05)
as compared with baseline. The Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score
improved in the active group (2 (2.3) to 0.8 (1.3)) as compared with placebo (2.2
(2.7) to 1.9 (2.8)), p<0.001, and synovitis detected by HRUS (33 patients, 285
joints) was reduced by 33% in the active group compared with 6% in the placebo
group (p<0.05). No improvement in Health Assessment Questionnaire or pain scores 
was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Synovitis detected by HRUS was significantly reduced. Combining CSA 
and MTX treatment in patients with active PsA, and a partial response to MTX,
significantly improves the signs of inflammation but not pain or quality of life.

PMCID: PMC1755527
PMID: 15528283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Rheumatol Int. 2002 Apr;21(6):234-8.

Long-term safety and efficacy of low-dose cyclosporin A in severe psoriatic
arthritis.

Sarzi-Puttini P(1), Cazzola M, Panni B, Turiel M, Fiorini T, Belai-Beyene N,
Chèrié-Lignièré EL.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, University Hospital L. Sacco, Milan, Italy.
sarzi@tiscalinet.it

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of
long-term treatment with cyclosporin A (CsA) in patients with psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: Sixty patients with PsA were enrolled in a prospective, nonrandomised
study of CsA. Patients with hypertension or hypercreatinemia were excluded.
Disease activity was evaluated according to clinical activity measures and the
Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI). Assessments were made at baseline and after
3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months. Measurements. The primary endpoints were 20% and 50%
improvement in disease activity according to American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) responses at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months. Other endpoints were 70% ACR
responses at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months and other measures of disease activity at
3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months.
RESULTS: Forty-nine patients completed the 24-month of treatment with CsA. When
all the clinical variables throughout the study were compared with baseline
results, they all showed significant improvement after 6 months of treatment.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR) reached a significant improvement after 12 
months of treatment (P<0.05). The PASI scores decreased from 15.1+/-4.3 to
5.2+/-2.7 after 24 months of treatment (P<0.001). Side effects included
hypertrichosis (24% of patients), gum hyperplasia (12%), gastrointestinal
intolerance (9%), hypertension (21%), neurological disturbance (7%), and
nephrotoxicity (17%). Three patients withdrew due to treatment failure. One
patient was lost to follow-up, and seven patients withdrew due to side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclosporin A represents a helpful second-choice treatment for
patients with active psoriatic arthritis. Administration of CsA necessitates
expert and careful follow-up of patients.

PMID: 12036210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Agents Actions. 1982 Apr;12(1-2):221-4.

The run-in period in trial design: a comparison of two non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents in psoriatic arthropathy.

Leatham PA, Bird HA, Wright V, Fowler PD.

Psoriatic arthropathy is a relatively uncommon arthritis that exists in a wide
variety of clinical forms. These two features of the disease cause problems in
the design of clinical trials. In a comparison of two non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents in this condition we attempted to overcome the
difficulties by using a run-in period during which the dosage of one of the trial
drugs was adjusted to suit the individual patient. After two weeks on
indomethacin (75 mg or 150 mg/day) patients were allocated to four-week periods
of indomethacin in the chosen dosage or diclofenac (75 mg or 150 mg/day) in a
double-blind randomized crossover trial that used double dummy packaging. Of the 
35 patients that entered the study, 19 completed both study groups. No
significant differences were observed between the clinical improvements due to
both drugs during the course of the study. In general more side-effects were seen
during indomethacin treatment, though the study design precluded exact
comparison. In a study biased against diclofenac, patient preference was 9/19 for
indomethacin, 4/19 for diclofenac and 7/19 expressing no choice. Advantages and
disadvantages of the study design are discussed.

PMID: 7044069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Ann Rheum Dis. 2003 Nov;62(11):1112-5.

Lymphocyte depletion with fludarabine in patients with psoriatic arthritis:
clinical and immunological effects.

Takada K(1), Danning CL, Kuroiwa T, Schlimgen R, Tassiulas IO, Davis JC Jr,
Yarboro CH, Fleisher TA, Boumpas DT, Illei GG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. takadak@mail.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: To obtain preliminary information on the safety and efficacy of
fludarabine in PsA and analyse its immunomodulatory effects in peripheral blood
and synovial tissue.
METHODS: 15 patients with active PsA who did not respond to DMARDs were randomly 
allocated to receive fludarabine every four weeks or placebo. Primary outcomes
were the proportion of patients who met the ACR20 and the psoriatic arthritis
response criteria (PsARC) at 16 weeks. Secondary outcomes were changes in tender 
or swollen joint counts and scores of the psoriasis area and severity index
(PASI). Phenotypic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC),
synovial immunohistochemistry, and functional analysis of PBMC were used to
determine the immunomodulatory effects of fludarabine.
RESULTS: At 16 weeks the ACR20 criteria were met by 3/7 (43%) fludarabine treated
v 0/8 placebo treated patients (p=0.08); the PsARC was achieved by 4/7 (57%)
fludarabine treated v 2/8 (25%) placebo treated patients; and 3/7 (43%)
fludarabine treated v 0/7 placebo treated patients had > or =20% improvement in
the PASI. Marked peripheral lymphopenia involving naive (CD4(+) CD45RA(+)) and
memory (CD4(+) CD45RO(+)) T cells, CD8(+) T cells, and B cells was seen in
fludarabine treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In PsA fludarabine induces significant peripheral, but modest,
synovial lymphopenia, and a trend towards improved clinical response.

PMCID: PMC1754350
PMID: 14583577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Arthritis Rheum. 2003 Aug 15;49(4):541-5.

Efficacy of infliximab in resistant psoriatic arthritis.

Salvarani C(1), Cantini F, Olivieri I, Macchioni P, Padula A, Niccoli L, Catanoso
MG, Scocco GL, Boiardi L.

Author information: 
(1)Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. salvarani.carlo@asmn.re.it

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the anti-tumor necrosis factor 
alpha monoclonal antibody infliximab in the treatment of active psoriatic
arthritis (PsA) resistant to previous symptom modifying antirheumatic drugs.
METHODS: Sixteen patients with peripheral active PsA with at least 6 months of
methotrexate (MTX) therapy at a stable dosage were treated with infliximab
administered at a dosage of 3 mg/kg at 0, 2, 6, 14, 22, and 30 weeks while
continuing to receive MTX. Intake of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and
corticosteroids was stable during the study period. Standard clinical
assessments, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C reactive protein (CRP)
were determined at baseline and at weeks 2, 6, 14, 22, and 30.
RESULTS: By week 2, significant improvements were registered in the number of
swollen and tender joints, visual analog scale for pain, patient and doctor
global disease assessment scores, Health Assessment Questionnaire, Dougados
functional index, ESR, and CRP. At week 30, the percentages of patients
satisfying American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20%, ACR 50%, and ACR 70%
response rates were 64%, 57%, and 57%, respectively. In the 3 patients with
active axial disease, spinal stiffness and pain resolved almost completely at
week 2 and the improvement did not diminish over time. Psoriasis Area Severity
Index improvement was 37% at week 2 and 86% at week 30. No patients dropped out
for treatment failure. Side effects were observed in 4 of 16 patients, 2 of whom 
suspended the therapy due to a severe allergic reaction.
CONCLUSION: In patients with resistant PsA, infliximab is an effective therapy
without major side effects.

PMID: 12910561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2008 Nov-Dec;26(6):1153-60.

Predicting duration of beneficial effect of joint injection among children with
chronic arthritis by measuring biomarkers concentration in synovial fluid at the 
time of injection.

Cattalini M(1), Maduskuie V, Fawcett PT, Brescia AM, Rosé CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Rheumatology, Pediatric Clinic,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Intra-articular corticosteroids injection (IAC) is a mainstay for the
treatment of children with chronic arthritis; nonetheless its efficacy showed
variability among published studies and it is still not possible to predict the
outcome in a single patient. Our objective was to study the profile of biomarkers
in the synovial fluid (SF) obtained at the time of injection and establish if
such profile predicts duration of effect.
METHODS: SF obtained from patients who underwent knee arthrocentesis and
injection was procured and stored for cytokine analysis. Records of those
patients who had at least 6 months of follow-up from the injection were reviewed.
Time to flare was recorded. Levels of IL-6, IL-1alpha, TNF-alpha, IL-2sR, MMP-3, 
IL-10 and TGF-Beta1 were measured by ELISA. For primary analysis each patient was
utilized once. For secondary analysis each injected knee was considered a single 
event.
RESULTS: 60 samples from 33 patients were obtained. In the primary analysis we
found a correlation between MMP-3 synovial fluid levels and outcome at 6 months
(p=0,02; p=0,03 for different quartiles). In the secondary analysis we found that
IL-6 and IL-10 levels predicted outcome at six and at 12 months (IL-6: p=0.01;
p=0.02 respectively) (IL-10: p=0.017; p=0.01 respectively), with higher levels of
IL-6 predicting shorter time to relapse and higher levels of IL-10 longer
duration of corticosteroids effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified MMP-3 and possibly IL-6 and IL-10 as candidates
for the development of a set of biomarkers to predict response to IAC among
children with chronic arthritis at the time of injection.

PMID: 19210889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2003 Nov;42(11):1383-9. Epub 2003 Jun 27.

Expression of the pro-inflammatory protein S100A12 (EN-RAGE) in rheumatoid and
psoriatic arthritis.

Foell D(1), Kane D, Bresnihan B, Vogl T, Nacken W, Sorg C, Fitzgerald O, Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
dfoell@uni-muenster.de

OBJECTIVES: Infiltration of synovial tissue by neutrophils is crucial in
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and seronegative arthritis
(SA). Altered vascular function and endothelial activation are important in PsA. 
S100A12 (EN-RAGE) is secreted by activated granulocytes and binds to the receptor
for advanced glycation end products, which induces nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB-dependent activation of endothelium.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical studies were performed to detect synovial S100A12
expression. We analysed serum and synovial fluid of 42 patients for S100A12
levels.
RESULTS: S100A12 was strongly expressed in inflamed synovial tissue whereas it
was nearly undetectable in synovia of controls or patients after successful
treatment. Serum levels of S100A12 correlated with disease activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Local expression of S100A12 in inflamed tissue suggests a role in
synovitis, especially in PsA. High serum concentrations of S100A12 in patients
with active arthritis compared with healthy controls or patients in remission
point to its usefulness as a serum marker.

PMID: 12832707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Rev Rhum Engl Ed. 1999 Oct;66(10):446-56.

Proposed classification criteria of psoriatic arthritis. A preliminary study in
260 patients.

Fournié B(1), Crognier L, Arnaud C, Zabraniecki L, Lascaux-Lefebvre V, Marc V,
Ginesty E, Andrieu V, Dromer C, Fournié A.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Department, Purpan Teaching Hospital, Toulouse, France.

Psoriatic arthritis probably owes to its radioclinical presentation its position 
as the most controversial and poorly understood of all major chronic inflammatory
joint diseases. Differentiating psoriatic arthritis from ankylosing spondylitis
and rheumatoid arthritis remains difficult.OBJECTIVE: To conduct a statistical
analysis aimed at identifying clinical, radiological, and laboratory criteria for
classifying psoriatic arthritis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 260 patients were studied retrospectively, including 100
cases with psoriatic arthritis and 160 controls with ankylosing spondylitis
meeting Amor's criteria (n = 80) or with rheumatoid arthritis meeting American
College of Rheumatology criteria (n = 80). Mean disease duration was five years. 
Thirty-nine variables were recorded for each patient. Multiple logistic
regression and discriminant analysis were used to select the classification
criteria.
RESULTS: Each of the two statistical methods selected the same nine criteria.
After assigning a weighting coefficient to each of these criteria, sensitivity
and specificity were better with the multiple logistic regression model (95% and 
98%, respectively) than with the discriminant analysis model.
CONCLUSION: Our classification criteria require further evaluation in multicenter
prospective studies.

PMID: 10567972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Radiol Med. 1999 Jul-Aug;98(1-2):15-8.

[Ultrasound patterns of rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis in finger joints].

[Article in Italian]

Iurassich S(1), Rossi E, Carbone M, Brunese L.

Author information: 
(1)Seconda Università degli Studi, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Servizio
Speciale di Terapia Fisica Dermatologica, Napoli.

PURPOSE: Rheumatoid and psoriasic arthritis involve proximal joints symmetrically
and distal joints asymmetrically, respectively, the differential diagnosis
between these two types of arthritis is not easy. Therefore we investigated which
US signs could help the diagnosis and/or treatment of these conditions and
compared them with radiographic patterns and articular and physical symptoms.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fifty-one patients, 30 women and 21 men aged 19-42 years
were enrolled in this study. Thirty patients had rheumatoid and 21 psoriasic
arthritis. US of the skin and joints of the fingers was performed with a GE
Sonora Logic 500 MD unit with 7.5 and 10 MHz scanheads. We studied the shape of
articular bone heads, the intra-articular space distance and the thickness of
extensor tendon and of the dermis and hypodermis covering it. These findings show
the extent of damage in articular bone heads and intra-articular space and they
indicate cutaneous and articular inflammation. US patterns were also compared
with radiographic findings in all patients.
RESULTS: US showed bone and joint and/or inflammatory damage in both types of
arthritis. Articular bone heads had a bodkin-like appearance in proximal
phalanges in rheumatoid arthritis, versus a hook-like appearance in distal
phalanges in psoriasic arthritis. Inflammatory damage was indicated by
intra-articular space thinning and by tendon, dermis and hypodermis thickening.
These signs, confirmed radiographically, account for finger deformation and
functional impairment, swelling and pain.
CONCLUSION: US signs can help the diagnosis of rheumatoid and psoriasic
arthritis. US can show inflammatory damage and the disease evolution.

PMID: 10566291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cleve Clin J Med. 1990 Oct;57(7):643-6.

Parenteral nitrogen mustard for inflammatory arthritis.

Wilke WS(1), Sexton C, Steck W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatic and Immunologic Disease, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
Ohio 44195.

A patient with progressive psoriatic arthritis refractory to methotrexate therapy
was treated empirically with intravenous nitrogen mustard, or HN2. His response
to therapy was compared with the responses of five rheumatoid arthritis patients 
treated with the same regimen. At 14 days after therapy was begun the patient
with psoriatic arthritis showed significant improvement, at least comparable to
that observed in the rheumatoid arthritis group. Intravenous HN2 therapy may be
an alternative to methotrexate for progressive psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 2225450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):299-308. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091669. Epub 2010 Feb
1.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in APECED or thymoma patients correlates with
autoimmunity to Th17-associated cytokines.

Kisand K(1), Bøe Wolff AS, Podkrajsek KT, Tserel L, Link M, Kisand KV, Ersvaer E,
Perheentupa J, Erichsen MM, Bratanic N, Meloni A, Cetani F, Perniola R,
Ergun-Longmire B, Maclaren N, Krohn KJ, Pura M, Schalke B, Ströbel P, Leite MI,
Battelino T, Husebye ES, Peterson P, Willcox N, Meager A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology,
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. kai.kisand@ut.ee

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):264-5.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is frequently associated with T cell
immunodeficiencies. Specifically, the proinflammatory IL-17A-producing Th17
subset is implicated in protection against fungi at epithelial surfaces. In
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, or
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome 1), CMC is often the first sign, but the
underlying immunodeficiency is a long-standing puzzle. In contrast, the
subsequent endocrine features are clearly autoimmune, resulting from defects in
thymic self-tolerance induction caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator
(AIRE). We report severely reduced IL-17F and IL-22 responses to both Candida
albicans antigens and polyclonal stimulation in APECED patients with CMC.
Surprisingly, these reductions are strongly associated with neutralizing
autoantibodies to IL-17F and IL-22, whereas responses were normal and
autoantibodies infrequent in APECED patients without CMC. Our multicenter survey 
revealed neutralizing autoantibodies against IL-17A (41%), IL-17F (75%), and/ or 
IL-22 (91%) in >150 APECED patients, especially those with CMC. We independently 
found autoantibodies against these Th17-produced cytokines in rare thymoma
patients with CMC. The autoantibodies preceded the CMC in all informative cases. 
We conclude that IL-22 and IL-17F are key natural defenders against CMC and that 
the immunodeficiency underlying CMC in both patient groups has an autoimmune
basis.

PMCID: PMC2822605
PMID: 20123959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Dermatolog Treat. 2009;20(6):354-8. doi: 10.3109/09546630902936752.

Long-term experience with etanercept in psoriatic arthritis patients: a 3-year
observational study.

Mazzotta A(1), Esposito M, Schipani C, Chimenti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical efficacy and tolerability of etanercept in
the treatment of active and progressive psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in patients who
have previously demonstrated an inadequate response to standard treatments, such 
as disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
METHODS: An open-label, non-controlled, prospective study was conducted including
32 patients affected by PsA with variable skin involvement who had responded
inadequately to at least two DMARDs. Patients received etanercept subcutaneously 
administered as monotherapy at the dosage of 50 mg twice weekly for 12 weeks
followed by 25 mg twice weekly. Clinical response was evaluated using the EULAR
(European League Against Rheumatism) disease activity score (DAS) in 28 joints
(DAS-28) and the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI). The percentage
improvement in DAS-28 and the proportion of patients achieving a PASI improvement
from baseline of between 50% and 75% (PASI 50), > 75% (PASI 75) and > 90% (PASI
90) were analysed as primary endpoints.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven (27/32) patients (84.3%) completed 3 years (144 weeks) of
continuous treatment, while 5/32 (15.6%) patients were withdrawn from the study. 
At week 144, a significant improvement in DAS-28 was registered with a reduction 
in mean DAS-28 from 5.3 at baseline to 1.8, while 25/27 patients (92.5%) achieved
PASI 75 with a mean PASI score of 0.7; the mean pain visual analogue scale
(pain-VAS) score decreased from 64.2 at baseline to 2 at week 144, corresponding 
to an improvement of 94.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: Etanercept is a safe and effective agent in the long-term management
of PsA patients. After 3 years of continuous treatment, symptoms were under
control in the majority of patients and there was a low level of disease
activity.

PMID: 19954392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Auton Neurosci. 2008 Dec 5;143(1-2):58-67. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2008.05.005.
Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Heart rate variability predicts anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy response for
inflammatory arthritis.

Holman AJ(1), Ng E.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Rheumatology Research, Inc., Renton, WA 98055, United States.
AJHSeattle@aol.com

To consider autonomic status as a predictor of anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
treatment response for inflammatory arthritis, we conducted an exploratory,
double-blind, 52-week study with 33 patients with rheumatoid (25) or psoriatic
(8) arthritis using heart rate variability (HRV). All were assessed for
parasympathetic, sympathetic, total power and tension index measures of autonomic
reactivity at initiation of anti-TNF therapy with etanercept (15) or adalimumab
(18). Clinical response was assessed at 6, 12, 26 and 52 weeks by internationally
accepted outcome criteria (ACR20/50/70 and DAS28 response). Predictive value was 
demonstrated for all HRV assessments (p-value range 0.001-0.032), except
sympathetic (p-value range 0.06-0.22), for ACR20, ACR50 and ACR70 at 52 weeks and
at as early as 6 weeks for some measures. Only parasympathetic and tension index 
predicted DAS28 outcome (p-value range 0.009-0.024). Poor anti-TNF response was
associated with low parasympathetic, low total power, high sympathetic and high
tension index measures, a profile also predominant in the prior anti-TNF failure 
subset (12). In conclusion, this unique, exploratory study suggests that HRV may 
be a novel, useful predictor of response to anti-TNF therapy in patients with
inflammatory arthritis, and emphasizes the importance of autonomic influence of
autoimmune disease expression.

PMID: 18632310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Sep;1110:649-60.

Impact of treatment with infliximab on serum cytokine profile of patients with
rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis.

Amital H(1), Barak V, Winkler RE, Rubinow A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine D, Meir Medical Center, Tshernichovsky 59, Kfar-Saba,
44281, Israel. howard.amital@clalit.org.il

This article analyzes the serum cytokine profile of a nonrandomized group of
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) who are
destined to be treated with infliximab following failure after failure of
different disease-modifiying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Serial serum samples
were collected from 11 patients with refractory RA, three with PsA and one with
undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy. All were treated with the antitumor
necrosis factor (TNF)alpha agent, infliximab, after failing to sustain a clinical
remission with conventional DMARDs. Blood samples were obtained at different
phases of their therapy. Serum levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)alpha,
interferon (IFN)gamma, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, sIL-2R, IL-10, and IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) were determined by commercial ELISA kits.
Interestingly, only eight of the 11 patients with RA had elevated TNFalpha serum 
levels (at least once in their serial measurements). Only one was unresponsive to
therapy and despite anti-TNFalpha therapy her serum TNFalpha levels remained
extremely high. Two RA patients who responded to infliximab had normal TNFalpha
serum levels prior to and following infliximab administration. One RA patient
improved after infliximab therapy despite unrelenting high serum levels of
TNFalpha, IL-6, and sIL-2R. Patients with active PsA who responded to infliximab 
therapy had sustained high serum TNFalpha levels. In an unselected population of 
RA and PsA patients, we noticed diverse patterns of serum cytokine profiles.
These results imply that the cytokine profiles of RA and PsA are diverse and
their pathogenesis is heterogeneous.

PMID: 17911480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Recenti Prog Med. 1995 May;86(5):183-8.

[Laboratory and instrumental clinical study of 150 patients with psoriatic
arthritis].

[Article in Italian]

Piazzini M(1), Fioravanti A, Sabadini L, Vassalli D, Bellisai F, Marcolongo R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Reumatologia, Università, Ospedale Le Scotte, Siena.

The study included a 5-year-follow-up. We noticed that our data did not agree
with the data in literature as regards the distribution percentage of the various
articular subsets. It was pointed out that the distribution percentage of some
particular clinical subsets of the disease (for example the symmetrical
polyarticular subset and the spondylitic and/or sacro-iliac subset) were linked
to sex. The study of the bio-humoral parameters showed that the most significant 
data was the particular clinical and radiological severity of PA in the patients 
with high IgA levels. Radiological findings showed the involvement of the
sterno-clavicular and manubriosternal joints by osteoproduction and/or erosive
manifestations, which was associated with a particular clinical severity of the
disease. Eventually, our study revealed a significant relationship between
psycho-physical stress and articular and/or cutaneous manifestations of the
disease. This data seems to confirm the recent neuro-immunological studies
hypothesizing a likely role of stress and subsequent depression in the
ethiopathogenesis of rheumatic diseases caused by an immune imbalance.

PMID: 7604173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2005 Jun;20(3):349-55.

Radiosynoviorthesis in osteoarthritis and other disorders with concomitant
synovitis in comparison to rheumatoid arthritis.

Rau H(1), Franke C, Goretzki G, Spitz J.

Author information: 
(1)Praxis für Nuklearmedizin, Wiesbaden, Germany. H.Rau@em.uni-frankfurt.de

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of
radiosynoviorthesis (RSO) in osteoarthritis and other disorders with concomitant 
synovitis versus rheumatoid arthritis by means of a standardized questionnaire.
METHODS: Eight-hundred and three RSO treatments were monitored in 691 patients by
seven centers in three countries, using standardized questionnaires. Patients
were assigned to three groups according to their age (20-40, 41-60, and 61-80
years). Additionally, the data was analyzed separately for patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (group A) and those with osteoarthritis, psoriasis
arthritis, pigmental villonodular synovitis, or persistent effusions after joint 
replacement (group B).
RESULTS: Quality of life improved in 78% of group A and 59% of group B (p <
0.01). Ameliorations of joint pain, swelling/effusion, or flexibility were found 
in 80% of group A and 56% of group B (p < 0.01). The response rate was similar
for small- and large-sized joints in group A, but was significantly higher for
large-sized joints in group B (p < 0.01). The positive effects on joint pain,
swelling/effusion, or flexibility lasted longer in group A (p < 0.01). Repeated
RSOs were as effective as initial RSOs. The clinical outcome was not influenced
by age, gender, or transient immobilization for 48 hours after RSO.
CONCLUSION: Although slightly more efficient in rheumatoid arthritis, RSO
represents an effective treatment option also in osteoarthritis and other
disorders with concomitant synovitis.

PMID: 15989483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Aug;56(8):2698-707.

Infliximab inhibits progression of radiographic damage in patients with active
psoriatic arthritis through one year of treatment: Results from the induction and
maintenance psoriatic arthritis clinical trial 2.

van der Heijde D(1), Kavanaugh A, Gladman DD, Antoni C, Krueger GG, Guzzo C, Zhou
B, Dooley LT, de Vlam K, Geusens P, Birbara C, Halter D, Beutler A.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
d.vanderheijde@kpnplanet.nl

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of infliximab on progression of structural
damage over 1 year in patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) enrolled in 
the Induction and Maintenance Psoriatic Arthritis Clinical Trial 2.
METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 200 patients with active
PsA were randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive infusions of infliximab (5
mg/kg) or placebo at weeks 0, 2, and 6, and every 8 weeks thereafter through week
54. At week 24, patients initially assigned to receive placebo crossed over to
receive infliximab (5 mg/kg). Based on predefined criteria, patients randomized
to receive placebo could enter early escape by receiving infliximab (5 mg/kg)
starting at week 16, and patients randomized to receive infliximab could have the
dose increased to 10 mg/kg starting at week 38. Patients were analyzed according 
to the treatment they were randomized to receive. Radiographs of hands and feet
were obtained at baseline and at weeks 24 and 54. Two readers blinded to
treatment assignment and radiograph sequence independently evaluated erosions and
joint space narrowing using the Sharp/van der Heijde scoring method modified for 
PsA.
RESULTS: At week 24, patients randomized to receive infliximab 5 mg/kg had
significantly less radiographic progression compared with patients randomized to 
receive placebo, with mean +/- SD changes from baseline in the total Sharp/van
der Heijde score of -0.70 +/- 2.53 and 0.82 +/- 2.62, respectively (P < 0.001).
At week 54, mean +/- SD changes from baseline in the total Sharp/van der Heijde
score were -0.94 +/- 3.40 in patients randomized to receive infliximab and 0.53
+/- 2.60 in those receiving placebo/infliximab (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Infliximab significantly inhibits radiographic progression in
patients with PsA as early as 6 months after starting treatment, and the
beneficial effect continues through 1 year of infliximab therapy.

PMID: 17665424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Rheumatol. 1998 Nov;25(11):2146-55.

Responsiveness of health status instruments to changes in articular status and
perceived health in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Husted JA(1), Gladman DD, Cook RJ, Farewell VT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Prognosis Studies in the Rheumatic Diseases and the Psoriatic
Arthritis Clinic, The Toronto Hospital, ON, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the responsiveness of the Health Assessment Questionnaire
(HAQ), Arthritis Impact Measurement Scale 2 (AIMS2), and Medical Outcome Study
Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) to changes in articular status and perceived
health in outpatients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: The 3 health status instruments were administered in random order on 2
occasions, about 12-18 months apart, to 70 patients attending the University of
Toronto psoriatic arthritis clinic. Standardized assessments of disease activity,
disease severity, and general health perceptions were also performed at each
clinic visit. To assess responsiveness we used: (1) linear regression analyses to
relate change scores for perceived health, the number of actively inflamed, and
damaged joints to change scores for selected dimensions of the HAQ, AIMS2, and
SF-36; (2) logistic regression analyses to relate both improvement in disease
activity and disease progression to health status change scores; and (3)
standardized response means (SRM).
RESULTS: There were 43 men and 27 women with a mean age of 46 years and arthritis
duration of 13 years. Univariate regression analyses showed that the individual
instruments were responsive to perceived changes in health, but relatively
insensitive to detect changes in articular status. Multivariate regression
analyses, in which the common dimensions of the instruments were jointly entered,
indicated the SF-36 was equally or more responsive to changes in number of
actively inflamed joints, clinical improvement in disease activity, and perceived
health than the HAQ and AIMS2. The SRM analysis also suggested that the SF-36 was
the most responsive.
CONCLUSION: The SF-36 proved equally or more responsive to short term changes in 
perceived health and inflammatory disease activity; however, none of the
instruments showed responsiveness to disease progression.

PMID: 9818657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Sep;69(9):1687-90. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.114207. Epub 2009
Jul 28.

Lack of effect of TNFalpha blockade therapy on circulating adiponectin levels in 
patients with autoimmune disease: results from two independent prospective
studies.

Peters MJ(1), Watt P, Cherry L, Welsh P, Henninger E, Dijkmans BA, McInnes IB,
Nurmohamed MT, Sattar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. mjl.peters@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Adiponectin is an anti-inflammatory and potentially antiatherogenic
molecule. Some recent reports suggest that tumour necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha) blockade therapy increases circulating adiponectin levels, but data
are sparse and inconsistent.
METHODS: Data from a double-blind placebo controlled study of onercept in 126
patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and from pre- and post-adalimumab
treatment in 171 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were used to examine the
effect of TNFalpha blockade therapy on adiponectin.
RESULTS: Despite expected associations of adiponectin with gender and baseline
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglyceride, adiponectin levels did not
change over time with TNFalpha blockade therapy in either group. The mean+/-SD
absolute change in adiponectin levels was -0.23+/-4.6 microg/ml in patients with 
PsA treated with combined onercept 50 mg and onercept 100 mg (vs placebo, p=0.60)
and 0.28+/-3.23 microg/ml in patients with RA treated with adalimumab (vs
baseline, p=0.66).
CONCLUSION: These results do not support a significant effect of TNFalpha
blockade therapy on circulating adiponectin levels in patients with autoimmune
disease.

PMID: 19640853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Sep;49(9):1056-70. doi: 10.1177/0091270009339192. Epub
2009 Jul 17.

Population pharmacokinetics of golimumab, an anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha
human monoclonal antibody, in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Xu Z(1), Vu T, Lee H, Hu C, Ling J, Yan H, Baker D, Beutler A, Pendley C, Wagner 
C, Davis HM, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)Centocor Research and Development, Malvern, Pennsylvania 19355, USA.

The population pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered golimumab (50 mg
or 100 mg every 4 weeks) were characterized in patients with active psoriatic
arthritis (PsA) in GO-REVEAL, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 study. A total of 2029 serum golimumab concentrations from 337 patients
were analyzed using NONMEM. A 1-compartment pharmacokinetic model with
first-order absorption and elimination was chosen to describe the observed
concentration-time data. For a patient of standard weight (70 kg), the population
estimates (typical value +/- standard error) for golimumab pharmacokinetic
parameters were as follows: apparent clearance = 1.38 +/- 0.04 L/d, apparent
volume of distribution = 24.9 +/- 1.04 L, and absorption rate constant = 0.908
+/- 0.121 per day. The between-subject variability was 37.6% in apparent
clearance and 37.9% in apparent volume of distribution. Body weight,
antibody-to-golimumab status, baseline C-reactive protein level, and smoking
status were identified as significant covariates on apparent clearance. Body
weight was also a significant covariate on apparent volume of distribution. None 
of the concomitant medications examined (methotrexate, corticosteroids, and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) were significant covariates on apparent
clearance, although the median trough golimumab concentration in patients
receiving methotrexate was higher than for those not receiving methotrexate.
These significant covariates account for part of the variability in systemic
exposure to golimumab observed in patients with PsA.

PMID: 19617465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Jul;48(7):570-4.

[A clinical study of leflunomide and methotrexate therapy in psoriatic
arthritis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang GL(1), Huang F, Zhang JL, Li XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety profile of methotrexate (MTX),
leflunomide (LEF) and low-dose MTX and LEF (MTX + LEF) combined treatment for
psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: This was a 24 weeks, two-center, open-labeled, controlled trial. All
subjects fulfilled the moll and wright criteria for definite PsA. Subjects were
given one of the 3 regimens, MTX, or LEF, or MTX + LEF. The primary end point was
proportion of psoriatic arthritis response criteria (PsARC) response. The
secondary end point was proportion of modified 20% improvement of American
College of Rheumatology (ACR20) response.
RESULTS: At week 24, the percent of patients achieving PsARC in MTX, LEF and MTX 
+ LEF group were 75.0%, 68.8%, 83.3% respectively, and the percent of patients
achieving ACR20 were 66.7%, 50.0%, 83.3% respectively. At week 24, tender joint
counts, swollen joint counts, patient's assessment of pain, patient's global
assessment (PGA), physician's global assessment, health assessment questionnaire 
(HAQ) were significantly improved compared with base-line values (P < 0.05). At
week 24, the improvement of patient's assessment of pain, HAQ, ESR were better in
the MTX + LEF group compared with LEF group while the improvement of patient's
assessment of pain, PGA, HAQ, ESR were better in the MTX group compared with LEF 
group (P < 0.05). The incidence of treatment related adverse events was 38.5%,
38.9% and 35% in MTX, LEF and MTX + LEF group respectively. There was no serious 
adverse reactions.
CONCLUSION: Low dose MTX + LEF regimen showed similar good efficacy and safety
profile for PsA patients.

PMID: 19957798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Int Med Res. 1997 Jul-Aug;25(4):206-9.

Colloidal silicic acid for the treatment of psoriatic skin lesions, arthropathy
and onychopathy. A pilot study.

Lassus A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helsinki Research Centre, Finland.

In a randomized, double-blind study, patients with chronic plaque-type psoriasis 
were either treated with 30 ml colloidal silicic acid gel, orally, daily, and
topically with the same gel (n = 15), or were treated identically with placebo
gel (n = 15) for 3 months. One stable psoriatic lesion on the knee or elbow was
treated topically and followed throughout the study. Five patients in the treated
group and seven controls had psoriatic arthropathy and 11 treated patients and 12
controls had psoriatic onychopathy. Three treated patients and six controls
withdrew because of skin irritation or lack of efficacy. In the treated group
there were clear improvements in scaling, induration and erythema after
treatment. The nail changes were cured in five of 10 evaluable patients in the
treated group and joint pain was reduced by almost half in the four evaluable
patients with arthropathy. There were no such improvements in the placebo group.

PMID: 9283994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Jun;124(6):1275-83.

Differential expression of phosphorylated NF-kappaB/RelA in normal and psoriatic 
epidermis and downregulation of NF-kappaB in response to treatment with
etanercept.

Lizzul PF(1), Aphale A, Malaviya R, Sun Y, Masud S, Dombrovskiy V, Gottlieb AB.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, New Jersey 08901-0019, USA. lizzulpa@umdnj.edu

Etanercept, a recombinant human tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor fusion
protein, is FDA approved for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. TNFalpha
increases the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and leads to the activation 
of multiple signaling pathways, including nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB). The
Rel/NF-kappaB transcription factors play a central role in numerous cellular
processes, including the stress response and keratinocyte proliferation and
differentiation. Utilizing a phosphorylation-specific antibody, we examined the
expression of active nuclear NF-kappaB/RelA via immunohistochemistry in normal
skin, non-lesional psoriatic skin, lesional psoriatic skin, and lesional skin
from patients treated with etanercept. There was no expression of active nuclear 
NF-kappaB in the normal epidermis, whereas a basal level of constitutive active
phosphorylated NF-kappaB/RelA was present in uninvolved epidermis from psoriasis 
patients. There was also significant upregulation of active phosphorylated
NF-kappaB/RelA in the epidermis from psoriatic plaques. Serial biopsies from
psoriasis patients treated with etanercept at 1, 3, and 6 mo demonstrated a
significant downregulation of phosphorylated NF-kappaB/RelA, which correlated
with decreases in epidermal thickness, restoration of normal markers of
keratinocyte differentiation, and clinical outcomes. These data suggest that
activation of NF-kappaB plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis
and that a potential mechanism of action for TNF-targeting agents is
downregulation of NF-kappaB transcriptional activity.

PMID: 15955104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Joint Bone Spine. 2006 Oct;73(5):527-31. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Extrasynovial ultrasound abnormalities in the psoriatic finger. Prospective
comparative power-doppler study versus rheumatoid arthritis.

Fournié B(1), Margarit-Coll N, Champetier de Ribes TL, Zabraniecki L, Jouan A,
Vincent V, Chiavassa H, Sans N, Railhac JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Clinique de Rhumatologie, CHU de Purpan, TSA 40031, 31059 Toulouse 
cedex 9, France. fournie.b@chu-toulouse.fr

We prospectively compared power Doppler ultrasound findings in 25 fingers with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 25 fingers with psoriatic arthritis (PsA). Erosive 
synovitis and tenosynovitis were seen in both groups. Extrasynovial changes were 
found in 21/24 (84%) fingers with PsA versus none of the fingers with RA. Of the 
21 PsA fingers exhibiting extrasynovial changes, 15 (15/25, 60%) also had
synovial changes. The extrasynovial changes reflected enthesitis or soft tissue
inflammation, with the main patterns being capsular enthesophyte, juxtaarticular 
periosteal reaction, enthesopathy at the site of deep flexor tendon insertion on 
the distal phalanx, and subcutaneous soft tissue thickening of the finger pad or 
entire finger. In four fingers, ultrasonograhy showed pseudotenosynovitis, an
underrecognized abnormality characterized by diffuse inflammation of the digital 
soft tissues. Pseudotenosynovitis may play a pivotal role in dactylitis (sausage 
digit), which is defined as diffuse uniform swelling of the entire finger. Our
findings suggest that inflammation of the fibrous skeleton of the finger may lead
to the clinical and radiological features that distinguish PsA from RA of the
finger.

PMID: 16942893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2000 Nov-Dec;18(6):732-4.

A preliminary study of etanercept in the treatment of severe, resistant psoriatic
arthritis.

Yazici Y(1), Erkan D, Lockshin MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Hospital for Special Surgery, Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2002 Jan-Feb;20(1):115.

OBJECTIVE: To survey the effectiveness of etanercept in the treatment of severe, 
resistant psoriatic arthritis.
METHODS: Ten patients coming from the clinical practice of 5 different
rheumatologists and already using etanercept (25 mg subcutaneously twice weekly) 
were formally assessed at 3 and 12 months after etanercept use.
RESULTS: All patients had improvement in their arthritis. Five of the 10 patients
had no arthritis, 4 required only etanercept for disease control at 3 months. At 
12 months, 8 of 10 patients were still on etanercept with continued good
response. One patient had to discontinue etanercept due to osteomyelitis, and one
due to increased disease activity. Of 4 patients with active skin disease, 3 had 
complete clearing. There were no side effects related to etanercept in this
small, heterogeneously collected group of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary and rather favorable experience with etanercept
suggests that properly controlled trials of this agent in psoriatic arthritis are
needed.

PMID: 11138337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Oral Rehabil. 1995 Oct;22(10):741-5.

Vertical asymmetry of the mandibular ramus and condylar heights measured with a
new method from dental panoramic radiographs in patients with psoriatic
arthritis.

Mattila M(1), Könönen M, Mattila K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Radiology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Vertical asymmetry of the mandibular ramus and condylar heights was measured with
a new method from dental panoramic radiographs. The study groups consisted of 45 
psoriatic arthritis (PA) and 45 control (CO) matched pairs. Vertical asymmetry
was calculated with the formula (R - L)/(R + L) x 100. Females showed no
statistical significant difference in vertical asymmetry between the PA and CO
pairs. In males however, vertical asymmetry showed a statistically significant
difference between the PA and CO groups among those aged 35-55 years (P = 0.008).
This group included four men with arthritis mutilans, a severe form of psoriatic 
arthritis.

PMID: 8606331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Scand J Rheumatol. 1994;23(5):237-42.

Effects of strength training on neuromuscular function and disease activity in
patients with recent-onset inflammatory arthritis.

Häkkinen A(1), Häkkinen K, Hannonen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiatry, Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland.

Thirty-nine consecutive patients with recent-onset rheumatoid or psoriatic
arthritis were randomly allotted for six months period either to the experimental
progressive dynamic strength training group (EG, 10 women and 11 men; 41 +/- 10
yrs), or to the control group (CG, 10 women and 8 men; 45 +/- 11 yrs) who just
maintained their habitual physical activities. All patients received
antirheumatic medication throughout the experimental period. During the study
period significant improvements took place in the EG in maximal muscle strength
of all examined muscle groups (31.5% for the knee extensors, p < 0.001; 14.8% and
10.7% for the trunk flexors and extensors, p < 0.01; 27.8% and 20.4% for grip
strength, p < 0.001) as well as in erytrocyte sedimentation rate (p < 0.05).
Ritchie's articular index (RI) (p < 0.001) and HAQ (p < 0.01). In the CG only the
decrease in RI was statistically significant (p < 0.05). Erosive changes in
joints increased only slightly and less in the EG than in the CG. The present
results suggest that dynamic strength training in early arthritis increases the
neuromuscular performance without detrimental effects on disease activity or
joint damage.

PMID: 7973476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Drugs Exp Clin Res. 1992;18(2):53-61.

Gold salts and somatostatin: a new combined analgesic treatment for psoriatic
arthritis.

Matucci-Cerinic M(1), Pignone A, Lotti T, Partsch G, Livi R, Cagnoni M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine IV, University of Florence, Italy.

In a group of patients affected with psoriatic arthritis the effects of the
association between gold salts (GS) and somatostatin (SOM), in comparison with
two groups treated with SOM and GS respectively, were investigated. Sixty
patients with psoriatic arthritis were selected and randomly allocated in three
groups of twenty patients each. Group 1 received SOM infusion (250 micrograms/h
for 96 h) and was assessed at baseline and 1, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120 days after; 
Group 2 received intramuscular GS and was assessed at baseline, four months
later, and then every month for four months; Group 3 received GS for 8 months; at
the fourth month SOM was infused (as in Group 1) and the patients assessed at
baseline four months later and then as Group 1. Assessment was made with the
Ritchie index, pain scale and morning stiffness evaluation. Growth hormone was
assayed in Group 1 every 4 h for 24 h the day before and the day after SOM
infusion. The association between GS and SOM demonstrated a particular analgesic 
activity, effective on joint pain and tenderness, that lasted for all four months
of follow-up. SOM showed a good response only after 15 and 30 days, and GS proved
to be effective at about the sixth month of treatment. Side effects were reported
in Group 1 (abdominal cramps, mild erythrodermia and supraventricular
arrhythmia). A growth hormone circadian rhythm was found in psoriatic patients
both before and after SOM treatment. The beneficial effect of the SOM/GS
combination is demonstrated in psoriatic arthritis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 1353720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Int Med Res. 1982;10(6):399-407.

Indoprofen in rheumatic patients with acute episodes: a multicentre trial.

Ambanelli U, Bassi G, Bianchi V, Carcassi U, Caruso I, Colombo B, Goretti P,
Mansoldo G, Marcolongo R, Pasero G, Pellegrini P, Pipitone V, Rubegni M, Todesco 
S, Accardo S, Bedendo A, Cervi G, Chérié-Lignière G, Ciompi M, Fumagalli M,
Giordano N, Lavezzari M, Loizzi P, Manganelli P, Perpignano G, Provvedi D, Rossi 
R.

The results are reported of an open multicentre trial in 228 rheumatic patients
with flare-ups. Fourteen centres adopting the same investigational protocol
collaborated in the study. Indoprofen was administered for 1 week at a daily
dosage of 1000 mg according to a treatment schedule used with success in acute
gouty arthritis: a 400 mg i.v. bolus was followed by 200 mg (1 tablet) t.i.d.
Subjective (pain) and objective variables were used for reliable assessment of
activity. Marked reduction of pain intensity was already noticeable on day 1 of
treatment and was followed by progressive improvement in subjective and objective
variables for all the diagnoses considered. According to the patients' own
overall assessments, results were good or very good in more than 50% of cases.
The best outcomes were obtained in low back pain, acute gout and psoriatic
arthritis. At the end of treatment only 7.4% of patients experienced no change or
deterioration of symptoms. Adverse reactions, consisting mostly of mild and
reversible gastrointestinal disturbances, were reported by 9.2% of patients, but 
only in 1.8% was treatment discontinued. Indoprofen administered according to the
above schedule is an appropriate treatment for acute episodes of rheumatic
diseases.

PMID: 6217996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Rheumatol. 2009 Aug;36(8):1811-5. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090351.

Testing an OMERACT MRI scoring system for peripheral psoriatic arthritis in
cross-sectional and longitudinal settings.

McQueen F(1), Lassere M, Duer-Jensen A, Wiell C, Conaghan PG, Gandjbakhch F,
Hermann KG, Bird P, Bøyesen P, Peterfy C, Ejbjerg B, Haavardsholm EA, Coates L,
Ostergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is increasingly used to measure
articular inflammation and damage in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA). We 
evaluated the reliability of a new OMERACT PsA MRI scoring system, PsAMRIS, in
PsA fingers.
METHODS: In 2 separate studies, MRI scans were obtained from patients with
clinical evidence of synovitis or dactylitis of the fingers. For the first
cross-sectional study, images were obtained at one timepoint. For the second
longitudinal study, images were obtained at 2 timepoints, 6 weeks apart. Scans
were scored using PsAMRIS in an international multireader setting, for synovitis,
tenosynovitis, periarticular inflammation, bone edema, bone erosions, and bone
proliferation.
RESULTS: Global status scores from both datasets revealed moderate to high
reliability for scoring most features, although reliability was poor for
periarticular inflammation in the cross-sectional study. Change scores that
reflected inflammatory activity also exhibited moderate to good reliability in
the longitudinal exercise, despite there being very little absolute change in MRI
synovitis or tenosynovitis observed in this dataset. At the distal
interphalangeal joints, reliability for change scores was acceptable only for
synovitis and tenosynovitis.
CONCLUSION: Further development and testing of the PsAMRIS is planned to improve 
its performance as a clinical and research tool to identify and measure pathology
in peripheral joint PsA.

PMID: 19671818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Rheumatol. 2000 Aug;27(8):1922-7.

Longterm therapy of psoriatic arthritis: intramuscular gold or methotrexate?

Lacaille D(1), Stein HB, Raboud J, Klinkhoff AV.

Author information: 
(1)Mary Pack Arthritis Centre, Department of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2001 Mar;28(3):682-3.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and toxicity of methotrexate (MTX) and
intramuscular (im) gold in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Medical records from all patients with PsA attending the gold and MTX
clinics at the Vancouver Mary Pack Arthritis Centre between 1971 and 1995 were
reviewed. The odds of a clinical response (defined as at least a 50% reduction in
active joint count from initial to last visit or for at least 6 months) and the
relative risk of discontinuing therapy associated with treatment (MTX or im gold)
were calculated after controlling for significant baseline covariates, using
logistic regression and Cox regression analyses, respectively. The frequency of
side effects and the reasons for treatment cessation were also compared between
treatment groups.
RESULTS: Eighty-seven patients received 111 treatment courses: 43 of MTX and 68
of im gold. The likelihood of a clinical response was 8.9 times greater (95% CI
1.8; 44.0) with MTX than im gold. Patients were 5 times more likely (95% CI 2.4; 
10.4) to discontinue therapy with im gold than with MTX. No major toxicity
occurred and frequency of side effects was similar for both treatments. Patients 
with a longer duration of PsA prior to initiation of study treatment were less
likely to achieve a clinical response.
CONCLUSION: MTX and im gold are safe and well tolerated in the treatment of PsA. 
In our experience. MTX was superior to im gold in the likelihood of achieving a
clinical response and in permitting an individual to continue longterm treatment.
Our data suggest that earlier treatment may be associated with a better response.

PMID: 10955334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Arthritis Rheum. 2002 Oct;46(10):2776-84.

Alefacept treatment in psoriatic arthritis: reduction of the effector T cell
population in peripheral blood and synovial tissue is associated with improvement
of clinical signs of arthritis.

Kraan MC(1), van Kuijk AW, Dinant HJ, Goedkoop AY, Smeets TJ, de Rie MA, Dijkmans
BA, Vaishnaw AK, Bos JD, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology F4-218, Academic Medical
Center/University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, NL-1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. m.c.kraan@amc.uva.nl

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether alefacept (a fully human lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 3 [LFA-3]/IgG1 fusion protein that blocks the
LFA-3/CD2 interaction) is able to reduce the signs and symptoms of joint
inflammation in patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Eleven patients with active PsA were treated with alefacept for 12 weeks
in an open-label and explorative study. Clinical joint assessment and laboratory 
assessments were performed at baseline and after 4, 9, 12, and 16 weeks of
treatment. Serial synovial tissue (ST) biopsy specimens from an inflamed index
joint (knee, ankle, wrist, or metacarpophalangeal joint) were obtained by
arthroscopy at baseline and after 4 and 12 weeks of treatment.
RESULTS: At the completion of treatment, 6 of 11 patients (55%) fulfilled the
Disease Activity Score (DAS) response criteria. Nine patients (82%) fulfilled the
DAS response criteria at any point during the study. There was a statistically
significant reduction in CD4+ lymphocytes (P < 0.05), CD8+ lymphocytes (P =
0.05), and CD68+ macrophages (P < 0.02) in the ST after 12 weeks of treatment
compared with baseline. The ST and peripheral blood of those patients fulfilling 
the DAS response criteria contained more CD45RO+ cells at baseline and displayed 
a significant reduction in these cells compared with nonresponding patients.
CONCLUSION: The changes in ST, together with the improvement in clinical joint
scores, after treatment with alefacept support the hypothesis that T cell
activation plays an important role in this chronic inflammatory disease.
Furthermore, since alefacept, a T cell-specific agent, led to decreased
macrophage infiltration, the data indicate that T cells are highly involved in
synovial inflammation in PsA.

PMID: 12384938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Isr Med Assoc J. 2001 Feb;3(2):147-50.

Balneotherapy at the Dead Sea area for patients with psoriatic arthritis and
concomitant fibromyalgia.

Sukenik S(1), Baradin R, Codish S, Neumann L, Flusser D, Abu-Shakra M, Buskila D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine D, Soroka University Medical Center and Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
ssukenik@mail.bgu.ac.il

BACKGROUND: Balneotherapy has been successfully used to treat various rheumatic
diseases, but has only recently been evaluated for the treatment of fibromyalgia.
Since no effective treatment exists for this common rheumatic disease,
complementary methods of treatment have been attempted.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness of balneotherapy at the Dead Sea area in 
the treatment of patients suffering from both fibromyalgia and psoriatic
arthritis.
METHODS: Twenty-eight patients with psoriatic arthritis and fibromyalgia were
treated with various modalities of balneotherapy at the Dead Sea area. Clinical
indices assessed were duration of morning stiffness, number of active joints, a
point count of 18 fibrositic tender points, and determination of the threshold of
tenderness in nine fibrositic and in four control points using a dolorimeter.
RESULTS: The number of active joints was reduced from 18.4 +/- 10.9 to 9 +/- 8.2 
(P < 0.001). The number of tender points was reduced from 12.6 +/- 2 to 7.1 +/- 5
in men (P < 0.003) and from 13.1 +/- 2 to 7.5 +/- 3.7 in women (P < 0.001). A
significant improvement was found in dolorimetric threshold readings after the
treatment period in women (P < 0.001). No correlation was observed between the
reduction in the number of active joints and the reduction in the number of
tender points in the same patients (r = 0.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Balneotherapy at the Dead Sea area appears to produce a
statistically significant substantial improvement in the number of active joints 
and tender points in both male and female patients with fibromyalgia and
psoriatic arthritis. Further research is needed to elucidate the distinction
between the benefits of staying at the Dead Sea area without balneotherapy and
the effects of balneotherapy in the study population.

PMID: 11344827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Br J Dermatol. 1996 Nov;135(5):752-7.

Anti-inflammatory efficacy of low-dose cyclosporin A in psoriatic arthritis. A
prospective multicentre study.

Mahrle G(1), Schulze HJ, Bräutigam M, Mischer P, Schopf R, Jung EG, Weidinger G, 
Färber L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Köln, Germany.

Fifty-five patients with psoriatic arthritis were treated with a low dose of
cyclosporin A (CyA) (mean dose 2.7 mg/kg per day) for a period of 6 months to
investigate the efficacy of CyA on disease parameters. Significant improvement in
the joint complaints and inflammation parameters was observed including a
decrease in the number of painful (-46%) and swollen (-45%) joints, tenderness
(Ritchie Index: -50%) and degree of swelling (-46%), patient's assessment of pain
(-35%), the duration of morning joint stiffness (-37%), as well as a decrease in 
C-reactive protein (-52%). A 50% reduction of joint complaints required a total
of 24 weeks, whereas a 50% reduction of skin involvement was achieved after 5-6
weeks of treatment. Four patients left the study due to adverse events:
creatinine level increase in two patients, hypertension in one patient and
gastroenteritis in the fourth patient. Joint scintigraphy in 18 patients
indicated an improvement or stable condition in 61% of cases after a mean
follow-up of approximately 8 months. The results of this prospective study show
that low-dose CyA effectively improves not only skin lesions, but also joint
complaints in psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 8977676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1995 Jul-Aug;13(4):459-63.

Folic acid and cyanocobalamin levels in serum and erythrocytes during low-dose
methotrexate therapy of rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis patients.

Leeb BF(1), Witzmann G, Ogris E, Studnicka-Benke A, Andel I, Schweitzer H, Smolen
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Second Dept. of Medicine, Lainz Hospital, Vienna, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: To compare folic acid (FA) levels in patients being treated with
methotrexate (MTX) with those of untreated patients in order to investigate
potential folate depletion by MTX and its possible relationship to the drug's
efficacy.
METHODS: In 33 patients on low-dose MTX therapy and in 24 controls, FA and
cyanocobalamin (B12) levels were determined in serum and red blood cells (RBC).
In addition, MTX levels in the RBC and serum were measured, and clinical and
laboratory measures of disease activity were evaluated.
RESULTS: MTX treated patients had lower FA levels than controls (median 4.36 vs
7.37 ng/ml, p < 0.001). A significant correlation between serum FA and MTX/RBC (p
< 0.01) and between the weekly dose and MTX/RBC (p < 0.01) was seen. There was
apparently no correlation between FA and the cumulative total MTX. MTX patients
had lower B12/RBC levels than the controls (p < 0.001); the serum levels of B12
were not different. Clinical features, ESR and CRP did not correlate with FA, B12
or MTX levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The degree of folate depletion during MTX therapy depends primarily 
upon the weekly administered dose. Folate depletion may be related to B12
deficiency in RBC. Since FA levels were not related to parameters of disease
activity it is conceivable that MTX does not exert its action in RA primarily by 
inhibiting dihydrofolatereductase. Therefore, additional folate compounds, if
necessary, should not lead to a reduction in the efficacy of MTX.

PMID: 7586777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Rheumatol. 1995 Feb;22(2):241-5.

Longterm methotrexate therapy in psoriatic arthritis: clinical and radiological
outcome.

Abu-Shakra M(1), Gladman DD, Thorne JC, Long J, Gough J, Farewell VT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto Rheumatic Disease Unit, ON, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether methotrexate (MTX) therapy for 24 months prevents
progression of radiographic damage in psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients who were given MTX during their attendance at the psoriatic
arthritis clinic were enrolled in the study. Patients who had never had MTX and
who were matched by damage, actively inflamed joints, sex, and disease duration
were identified from the PsA database as controls. The outcome measure was
increase in the number of damaged joints.
RESULTS: The study population comprised 38 patients (16 F, 22 M) with a mean age 
of 44.6 years and disease duration of 11.4 years. Twenty-three patients continued
therapy for 24 months. Clinical evaluation revealed that 45% of the patients had 
> or = 40% improvement in actively inflamed joint count at 6 and 24 months.
Radiographs were available for 19 of the 23 patients who took MTX for 24 months, 
and they were compared to their respective controls. Radiographic damage scores
at 24 months showed an increase in the damage score in 63% of the patients.
Compared to the matched controls, there was no statistically significant
difference in the progression in damage.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that compared to other regimens, MTX conferred no
advantage with respect to clinical response or longterm damage even after 24
months of therapy.

PMID: 7738945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Mar;67(3):296-301. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

The effect of etanercept on osteoclast precursor frequency and enhancing bone
marrow oedema in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Anandarajah AP(1), Schwarz EM, Totterman S, Monu J, Feng CY, Shao T, Haas-Smith
SA, Ritchlin CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, University of Rochester,
New York, USA. allen_anandarajah@urmc.rochester.edu

OBJECTIVE: The frequency of osteoclast precursors (OCPF) and the presence of bone
marrow oedema (BMO) are potential response biomarkers in psoriatic arthritis
(PsA). Previous studies suggest a central role for tumour necrosis factor (TNF)
in the formation of osteoclast precursors. To better understand this association,
the effect of etanercept on OCPF and BMO was analysed in PsA patients with
erosive arthritis.
METHODS: A total of 20 PsA patients with active erosive PsA were enrolled.
Etanercept was administered twice weekly for 24 weeks. OCPF was measured and
clinical assessments were performed at baseline, 2, 12 and 24 weeks. Gadolinium
enhanced MR images were obtained at baseline and 24 weeks.
RESULTS: Significant improvements in joint score (p<0.001), HAQ scores (p<0.001) 
and SF-36 parameters were observed after 6 months of therapy with etanercept
compared to baseline. The median OCPF decreased from 24.5 to 9 (p = 0.04) and to 
7 (p = 0.006) after 3 months and 6 months of treatment, respectively. MR images
were available for 13 patients. The BMO volume decreased in 47 and increased in
31 sites at 6 months. No correlation was noted between OCPF, BMO and clinical
parameters.
CONCLUSION: The rapid decline in OCPF and overall improvement in BMO after
anti-TNFalpha therapy provides one mechanism to explain the anti-erosive effects 
of TNF blockade in PsA. Persistence of BMO after etanercept treatment, despite a 
marked clinical response, was unexpected, and suggests ongoing subchondral
inflammation or altered remodelling in PsA bone.

PMID: 17967829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Br J Rheumatol. 1996 Jul;35(7):664-8.

Sulphasalazine in psoriatic arthritis: a randomized, multicentre,
placebo-controlled study.

Combe B(1), Goupille P, Kuntz JL, Tebib J, Lioté F, Bregeon C.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU Montpellier-Nîmes, France.

A prospective double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study of 24 weeks
duration was carried out comparing the efficacy and tolerability of
sulphasalazine (SSZ) versus placebo in patients with psoriatic arthritis. A total
of 120 patients were included in nine centres. All patients had active disease
and fulfilled the criteria of definite psoriatic arthritis of at least 3 months
duration. They received either SSZ (2.0 g/day) or placebo. Efficacy variables
included pain, patient's overall assessment of joint and skin improvement,
morning stiffness, Ritchie articular index, ESR and CRP. An intention-to-treat
(ITT) analysis was performed for the 117 patients who qualified (three patients
did not qualify due to missing data after baseline). A per-protocol analysis was 
performed for the 81 patients who completed the 6 months study period (SSZ = 38, 
placebo = 43). Major reasons for withdrawal were inadequate response (SSZ = 4,
placebo = 7) and adverse events (SSZ = 8, placebo = 12). Pain was the only
statistically significantly different primary outcome variable at end point in
favour of SSZ in the ITT analysis. No significant differences were present in
other clinical or biological variables, although there was a trend in favour of
SSZ for some variables. SSZ, at a dose of 2.0 g/day, appeared to be a safe
treatment in patients with psoriatic arthritis. At this dosage, its efficacy was 
only demonstrated for the pain variable.

PMID: 8670601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Br J Rheumatol. 1990 Aug;29(4):280-3.

A multicentre double-blind comparison of auranofin, intramuscular gold thiomalate
and placebo in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Palit J(1), Hill J, Capell HA, Carey J, Daunt SO, Cawley MI, Bird HA, Nuki G.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatic Diseases Unit, Northern General Hospital, Edinburgh.

The efficacy and safety of the oral gold compound auranofin and intramuscular
gold thiomalate have been compared in a placebo-controlled, double-blind,
four-centre trial in 82 patients with psoriatic arthritis requiring remittive
drug therapy. There were statistically significant falls in Ritchie articular
index, visual analogue pain score and ESR at 12 and 24 weeks following i.m. gold 
but no significant changes in the auranofin group. Intramuscular gold was safe
and more effective than auranofin as a second-line, suppressive antirheumatic
agent for patients with psoriatic arthritis when followed for 6 months.

PMID: 2116206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Br J Dermatol. 2008 Aug;159(2):453-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08686.x. Epub
2008 Jun 28.

Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of infliximab on psoriatic nails: an
unblinded, nonrandomized, open-label study.

Rigopoulos D(1), Gregoriou S, Stratigos A, Larios G, Korfitis C, Papaioannou D,
Antoniou C, Ioannides D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nail Unit, University of Athens Medical School, A
Sygros Hospital, Athens, Greece. drigop@hol.gr

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in the treatment of skin psoriasis during the last
years, therapy of psoriatic nails remains a challenge. Objectives The objective
of this unblended, nonrandomized, open-label study was to evaluate the efficacy
and safety of infliximab on nail psoriasis.
PATIENTS/METHODS: Eighteen psoriatic patients with nail involvement,
consecutively selected among patients scheduled to start infliximab infusions
were included in the study. Thirteen of these patients had psoriatic arthritis
and five had severe plaque type psoriasis. Outcome measures were assessed at
baseline and at weeks 14, 22, 30 and 38 using the nail psoriasis severity index
(NAPSI). Patients also filled in a Greek translation of the international
onychomycosis-specific questionnaire to assess improvement in quality of life
after improvement of psoriatic nail signs.
RESULTS: All 18 patients completed the study. Significant improvement was noted
in most patients after the third infusion as shown by the reduction of mean NAPSI
(NAPSIm) from 55.8 at baseline to 29.8 at week 14. Evaluation after six
infusions, at week 38, showed an almost complete resolution of psoriatic nail
involvement (NAPSIm: 3.3). No adverse event was observed. All patients reported
satisfaction with the results and significant improvement in their quality of
life with reduction of the score of the international quality of life
questionnaire from 66.3 at baseline to 19.1 at week 38.
CONCLUSIONS: Alphalthough there is no control group, this data suggests that
infliximab is effective for psoriatic nail disease in the context of severe skin 
and joint involvement.

PMID: 18565184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Scand J Rheumatol. 1996;25(5):277-81.

Clinical assessment of the 1987 American College of Rheumatology criteria for
rheumatoid arthritis.

Levin RW(1), Park J, Ostrov B, Reginato A, Baker DG, Bomalaski JS, Borofsky M,
Gardiner M, Leventhal L, Louthrenoo W, von Feldt J, Kolasinski S, Schumacher HR
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Division, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

Comment in
    Scand J Rheumatol. 1997;26(3):229.

The 1987 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for the classification
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were clinically assessed. These criteria do not
include findings of synovial fluid (SF) analysis and require no exclusion
criteria. We have studied sequential patients with arthritis seen in four
rheumatology centers in the Philadelphia area. Classifications by the ACR
criteria were compared with our clinical diagnoses. Two hundred ninety eight
patients were evaluated, 113 with RA and 185 with other diagnoses.
Classifications as RA by the ACR criteria corresponded to our clinical diagnosis 
in 95% of the cases, corroborating the high sensitivity previously reported.
However, we found a lower specificity (73%) than that reported (89%). False
positive classifications as RA were found in 71% of patients with psoriatic
arthritis, 48% of patients with SLE, and 31% of patients with gout. The
specificity could be improved to 89% by excluding disorders with obvious
distinguishing extraarticular features such as psoriasis or by SF findings of
monosodium urate crystals. Awareness of these possible sources of confusion will 
further increase the teaching and epidemiologic value of these useful simplified 
criteria.

PMID: 8921919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Dec 15;57(8):1560-3.

Sensitivity of the classification of psoriatic arthritis criteria in early
psoriatic arthritis.

Chandran V(1), Schentag CT, Gladman DD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Prognosis Studies in the Rheumatic Diseases, Toronto Western
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PMID: 18050230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 May;50(5):1636-41.

Antiangiogenic effects of anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha therapy with
infliximab in psoriatic arthritis.

Cañete JD(1), Pablos JL, Sanmartí R, Mallofré C, Marsal S, Maymó J, Gratacós J,
Mezquita J, Mezquita C, Cid MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Clínic de l'Aparell Locomotor, and Unitat d'Artritis, Servei de
Reumatologia, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Villaroel 170, 08036 Barcelona,
Spain. jcanete@clinic.ub.es

OBJECTIVE: Neovascularization, with an increased number of synovial vessels with 
a characteristic morphology, seems to contribute to the progression of psoriatic 
arthritis (PsA). Accordingly, angiogenesis may be an important therapeutic target
in PsA. The aim of this study was to analyze the effects of infliximab on
angiogenesis in the synovial membrane of patients with PsA who responded to this 
therapy.
METHODS: The study group comprised 9 patients with PsA who were selected for the 
presence of active polyarthritis (including knee synovitis) despite methotrexate 
therapy. Clinical and biologic evaluations were performed at each visit.
Arthroscopy and synovial biopsies were performed at week 0, before infliximab
therapy was initiated, and at week 8, after administration of 3 intravenous
infusions of infliximab (5 mg/kg). We used immunohistochemistry to identify
changes in infiltrating cells and in the angiogenesis modulators alphavbeta3
integrin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin 2 (Ang-2),
flt-1 (VEGF receptor 1 [VEGFR-1]), kinase insert domain receptor [KDR]/flk-1
(VEGFR-2), and stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1). Neovascularization was
assessed by automated histomorphometry of CD31+ vessels and by measuring
alphavbeta3 expression.
RESULTS: Rapid and significant clinical and biological improvement were observed 
after treatment in all patients. In the synovium, infliximab therapy induced a
significant reduction in macrophages, the CD31+ vascular area, alphavbeta3+
neovessels/Ulex europaeus agglutinin+ vessels, VEGF and its receptor KDR/flk-1
(VEGFR-2), and SDF-1+ vessels. Expression of flt-1 (VEGFR-1), and SDF-1 in lining
cells showed a nonsignificant reduction, whereas expression of Ang-2 increased.
In 3 patients, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction confirmed the
changes in some of these markers at the messenger RNA level.
CONCLUSION: These results show consistent changes in several factors involved in 
angiogenesis regulation, in parallel with the clinical response to infliximab in 
patients with PsA. The pattern of reduced VEGF with increased Ang-2 suggests
vascular regression as a potential mechanism underlying the antiangiogenic effect
of infliximab.

PMID: 15146434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Nov;47(11):1712-8. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken380. 
Epub 2008 Sep 24.

Effects of a modular behavioural arthritis education programme: a pragmatic
parallel-group randomized controlled trial.

Hammond A(1), Bryan J, Hardy A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rehabilitation & Human Performance Research, Brian Blatchford
Building, University of Salford, Frederick Road, Salford M66PU, UK.
a-hammond@salford.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: Rheumatology guidelines recommend people with RA receive behavioural 
self-management education. This study developed a modular behavioural group
programme and evaluated its longer term effects on pain, physical and
psychological status.
METHODS: People with RA or PsA were randomized to a modular behavioural or
standard information-focused education programme, both delivered by experienced
rheumatology health professionals at one large district general hospital. Outcome
measures were pain, self-efficacy, fatigue, functional ability, psychological
status and use of health behaviours (exercise, joint protection, fatigue and
cognitive symptom management). Using an intent-to-treat analysis outcomes were
compared at 6 and 12 months with analysis of covariance.
RESULTS: Out of 498 referred patients, 218 agreed to participate, met entry
criteria and were randomized; 51 withdrew before education. Of the remaining
patients, 86 attended the behavioural and 81 the standard programmes.
Participants were aged 55.4 yrs (s.d. 12.42) with disease duration of 7.39 (s.d. 
6.88) yrs (53% <5 yrs). At 6 months, the behavioural group had better pain (P =
0.01), fatigue (P = 0.01), functional ability (P = 0.05) and self-efficacy (P =
0.01) scores and greater use of health behaviours. At 12 months, they continued
to have better pain (P = 0.03), self-efficacy (P = 0.001) and psychological
status (P = 0.0001) scores and greater use of some health behaviours.
CONCLUSION: Attending a modular behavioural education programme is effective for 
at least 1 yr in enabling people with RA and PsA to reduce pain, improve
psychological status and self-manage their condition.

PMID: 18815153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Rheumatol. 2003 May;30(5):1022-6.

Clinical and radiological changes during psoriatic arthritis disease progression.

Khan M(1), Schentag C, Gladman DD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the contribution of radiological findings at the initial 
visit with respect to classifying patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA); and to
determine the extent to which the clinical disease patterns change over time.
METHODS: Patients with PsA were followed prospectively at 6-12 month intervals
since 1978; 86 patients were registered within 1 year of diagnosis and were
followed for at least 1 year. Based on the clinical information, including the
actively inflamed joint count, damaged joint count, and the presence of back
disease and arthritis mutilans, a clinical PsA pattern was assigned. A separate
radiology pattern based on radiographs alone, and a combined clinical and
radiological pattern, was also assigned at each visit. The initial clinical
pattern was compared to the initial combined clinical-radiological pattern, and
the initial clinical pattern was compared to the clinical pattern at 1 year and 5
years in 35 patients with both 1 and 5 year followup.
RESULTS: In 23% of the patients, the radiological assessment in the initial visit
showed evidence of patterns not detected clinically; 49% and 77% of the patients 
showed clinical pattern change within 1 year and 5 years, respectively. A
comparison between the group that changed pattern and the one that did not change
pattern in 5 years revealed no significant features.
CONCLUSION: Radiological assessments add information not gained from clinical
assessment alone. Clinical patterns do change over time in the majority of
patients. Both elements must be taken into consideration when developing
classification criteria for PsA.

PMID: 12734899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 1;167(7):4075-82.

IL-10 improves skin disease and modulates endothelial activation and leukocyte
effector function in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

McInnes IB(1), Illei GG, Danning CL, Yarboro CH, Crane M, Kuroiwa T, Schlimgen R,
Lee E, Foster B, Flemming D, Prussin C, Fleisher TA, Boumpas DT.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Rheumatism Branch, National Institute of Arthritis,
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) provides an ideal disease model in which to investigate
the bioactivities of potentially therapeutic cytokines at multiple sites of
tissue inflammation. We investigated the effects of IL-10, an antiinflammatory
cytokine, given s.c. for 28 days in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in
PsA patients. Synovial/skin biopsies, peripheral blood leukocytes, articular
magnetic resonance images, and clinical disease activity scores were obtained
sequentially. Modest, but significant clinical improvement in skin, but not
articular disease activity scores with only minor adverse effects was observed.
Type 1, but not type 2 T cell cytokine production in vitro was suppressed in
human rIL-10 compared with placebo recipients. Similarly, monokine production in 
vitro was reduced, whereas serum soluble TNFRII levels were elevated, indicating 
suppression of monocyte function. Decreased T cell and macrophage infiltration in
synovial tissues was accompanied by reduced P-selectin expression. Moreover,
suppressed synovial enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging and reduced
alpha(v)beta(3) integrin expression on von Willebrand factor(+) vessels were
observed. Together these data demonstrate that a short course of IL-10 modulates 
immune responses in vivo via diverse effects on endothelial activation, and
leukocyte recruitment and effector function. Such biological changes may result
in clinically meaningful improvement in disease activity.

PMID: 11564829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Rheumatol. 1998 Oct;25(10):1957-61.

The use of sulfasalazine in psoriatic arthritis: a clinic experience.

Rahman P(1), Gladman DD, Cook RJ, Zhou Y, Young G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic, Centre for Prognosis Studies
in the Rheumatic Diseases, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the tolerability of sulfasalazine in a clinic setting and
determine its longterm effectiveness with respect to articular disease and
prevention of radiographic progression in patients with psoriatic arthritis
(PsA).
METHODS: Patients who were given sulfasalazine during their attendance at the
University of Toronto Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic were enrolled in the study. For 
patients that were able to tolerate sulfasalazine for at least 3 months a matched
control was identified who did not receive sulfasalazine. The primary outcome
measures were the tolerability of sulfasalazine, clinical response of the
actively inflamed joints at 6 and 12 months, and the change in radiographic score
at 24 months.
RESULTS: Thirty-six patients received sulfasalazine. Fourteen of 16 patients
discontinued sulfasalazine due to one or more side effects occurring within 3
months of treatment initiation. For the remaining 20 patients, a 50% reduction in
actively inflamed joint count was noted in 7/20 patients at 6 months and 11/15
patients at 12 months, compared to 7/19 patients in the control group at 6 months
and 10/20 patients at 12 months. The mean change in the radiographic score at 24 
months between the 2 groups was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Sulfasalazine was not well tolerated in patients with PsA in our
clinic. For those able to tolerate sulfasalazine, there was no evidence of a
treatment effect with respect to articular involvement. In addition,
sulfasalazine does not appear to halt radiographic progression in PsA.

PMID: 9779850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 1994 Sep;97(9):1621-30.

[Efficacy of tonsillectomy for improving skin lesions of Pustulosis palmaris et
plantaris--evaluation of 289 cases at the Department of Otolaryngology of Sapporo
Medical University].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsubota H(1), Kataura A, Kukuminato Y, Hamamoto M, Ohguro S, Shido F, Takezawa H,
Shintani T, Hirao M, Saitoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Sapporo Medical University, School of Medicine.

In recent years, Pustulosis palmaris et plantaris (PPP) has been described as one
of the representative second lesions of focal tonsillitis in Japan. We selected
289 cases of PPP, treated with bilateral tonsillectomy at our department over the
past 12 years for this clinical evaluation. In 211 of those 289 tonsillectomy
cases, follow-up was done for more than 3 months after operation. Prior to
tonsillectomy, 196 cases suffered from PPP only, 90 cases had the complication of
osteo-arthral lesions such as sterno-costa-clavicular hyperosteosis (SCCH),
rheumatoid arthritis, and soon, whereas only 3 cases showed simultaneous lesions 
of Psoriasis vulgaris. The efficacy of tonsillectomy for improving the skin
lesions was classified into 6 grades, mainly based upon individual evaluation by 
each patient as follows; disappeared, remarkably improved, improved, slightly
improved, unchanged, and worsened. According to our 211 cases, post tonsillectomy
improvement of skin lesions was very obvious, with disappearance occurring in
54.3% of cases and remarkable improvement in 21.4%. Age of onset and the duration
from onset to tonsillectomy showed no association with effectiveness. However,
the shorter the duration from onset to tonsillectomy, the fewer days were
required for improvement of the skin lesions. The rate of improvement of PPP rose
in conjunction with the number of days after tonsillectomy. We conclude that it
requires 12 months, at minimum, to determine the efficacy of tonsillectomy as a
treatment for PPP.

PMID: 7965376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Feb;66(2):163-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Adalimumab improves joint-related and skin-related functional impairment in
patients with psoriatic arthritis: patient-reported outcomes of the Adalimumab
Effectiveness in Psoriatic Arthritis Trial.

Gladman DD(1), Mease PJ, Cifaldi MA, Perdok RJ, Sasso E, Medich J.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Hospital, Centre for Prognosis Studies in the Rheumatic
Diseases, 1E-410B, 399 Bathurst Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 2S8.
dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of adalimumab on patient-reported outcomes of 
joint-related and skin-related functional impairment, health-related quality of
life, fatigue and pain in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Patients with moderately- to severely- active PsA were treated with
adalimumab, 40 mg, every other week, or placebo, in this 24-week, randomised,
controlled trial. Patient-reported outcomes included the Health Assessment
Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ DI), Short-Form 36 Health Survey (SF-36), the
Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-Fatigue) Scale
and the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI).
RESULTS: Adalimumab (n = 151) and placebo (n = 162) groups were comparable with
respect to baseline demographics and disease severity. Significant changes from
baseline in HAQ DI were reported for adalimumab v placebo (-0.4 v -0.1, p<0.001) 
at both 12 and 24 weeks. At week 24, significant improvements in the SF-36
domains of physical functioning, role-physical, bodily pain, general health,
vitality and social functioning, as well as the physical component summary score,
were observed for adalimumab versus placebo (p<0.01). These reported changes in
HAQ DI and SF-36 were also clinically important. Significantly more patients
treated with adalimumab had complete resolution of functional loss (HAQ DI = 0)
and dermatological-related functional limitations (DLQI = 0) compared with
placebo at weeks 12 and 24 (p< or =0.001). Adalimumab led to significantly
greater improvements in FACIT-Fatigue scores, pain scores, and disease activity
measures versus placebo at 12 and 24 weeks (p<0.001 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab improved physical-related and dermatological-related
functional limitations, HRQOL, fatigue and pain in patients with PsA treated for 
24 weeks.

PMCID: PMC1798491
PMID: 17046964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Jun;1069:145-8.

Prolactin and growth hormone responses to hypoglycemia in patients with systemic 
sclerosis and psoriatic arthritis.

Rovensky J(1), Raffayova H, Imrich R, Radikova Z, Penesova A, Macho L, Lukac J,
Matucci-Cerinic M, Vigas M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Rheumatic Diseases, Nabr. I. Krasku 4, 921 23 Piestany, 
Slovakia. rovensky@nurch.sk

This study compared prolactin (PRL) and growth hormone (GH) responses to
hypoglycemia in premenopausal females with systemic sclerosis (SSc) and psoriatic
arthritis (PsA) with those in matched healthy controls. No differences were found
in glucose and GH responses to hypoglycemia in both groups of patients compared
to controls. SSc patients had lower PRL response (P < 0.05) to hypoglycemia
compared to controls. PRL response tended to be lower also in PsA patients,
however the difference did not reach level of statistical significance (P =
0.11). The present study showed decreased PRL response to hypoglycemia in
premenopausal females with SSc.

PMID: 16855141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res. 2000;20(1-2):1-11.

Treatment with cyclosporin in patients with psoriatic arthritis: results of
clinical assessment.

Raffayová H(1), Rovenský J, Mális F.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Rheumatic Diseases Pieśt'any, Slovak Republic.

An open 18-week study with a preparation of cyclosporin administered to patients 
with psoriatic arthritis confirmed the therapeutic efficacy of the preparation.
Given the low frequency of adverse effects (at the initial and maintenance daily 
dose), the preparation could also be considered relatively safe. A pronounced
improvement in psoriatic symptoms was observed during the study. As early as 2
weeks after administration of an average daily dose of cyclosporin A of 4.8
mg/kg, skin symptoms improved by 65.5%. The most intense effect on the activity
of arthritis was observed after 18 weeks. The lowest optimal effective
maintenance dose was 3.26 mg/kg/day. Improvement was achieved after an average of
10 weeks' cyclosporin administration.

PMID: 11146896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Rheumatol. 1995 May;22(5):894-8.

Sulfasalazine therapy for psoriatic arthritis: a double blind, placebo controlled
trial.

Gupta AK(1), Grober JS, Hamilton TA, Ellis CN, Siegel MT, Voorhees JJ, McCune WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, USA.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 1996 Apr;23(4):791-2.

OBJECTIVE: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is often poorly responsive to 2nd line
antirheumatic drug therapy. Sulfasalazine has recently gained wide acceptance in 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and beneficial effects have also been
noted in ankylosing spondylitis and reactive arthritis. We report a double blind 
placebo controlled study of sulfasalazine in PsA.
METHODS: Twenty-four patients with active PsA were randomized to receive either
sulfasalazine (3 g/day) (n = 10) or placebo (n = 14) for 8 weeks, in a double
blind manner, followed by an 8 week open label crossover phase for nonresponding 
placebo patients.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo controls, sulfasalazine treated patients were
significantly improved at Weeks 4 and 8 with respect to physician (p < 0.01) and 
patient (p < 0.05) global assessments. Duration of morning stiffness was
significantly decreased at Week 8 (p < 0.01). Clinical variables of disease
activity returned to baseline after a 4 week drug washout period in 5 evaluable
patients. Six patients in the placebo group crossed over to an 8 week open label 
phase and demonstrated significant improvements in joint scores, 50 ft walking
time, and global patient assessment. Sulfasalazine treated patients also showed
significant improvements in cutaneous involvement.
CONCLUSION: Sulfasalazine was effective in PsA, with efficacy observed as early
as the 4th week of treatment. Longterm studies are needed to determine whether
such therapy can modify disease outcome.

PMID: 8587078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biomed Khim. 2003 Sep-Oct;49(5):484-90.

[Hemorheological and clinical efficiency of a new phospholipid hepatoprotective
drug Phosphogliv in patients with psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Ipatova OM, Nasonov EL, Korotaeva TV, Firsov NN, Ivkina OA, Torkhovskaia TI,
Archakov AI.

A new phospholipid drug "Posphogliv" showed earlier good results in the treatment
of liver discases. The mechanism of its effect consists in non-specific repair of
biomembranes. In the present study it was used for the treatment of in patients
with psoriatic arthritis, accompanied by severe damages of blood rheology. The
group of patients took Phosphogliv 3 months in the dose of 0.6 g per day.
Considerable decrease of erythrocytes aggregability was observed after the
treatment. There were no changes in total blood viscosity. The clinical state of 
patients markedly improved after the treatment. Simultaneous decrease of blood
C-reactive protein level suggests weakening of inflammation. The mechanism of
these effects may involve direct influence of the phospholipid on erythrocyte
membranes and/or with indirect influence through the improvement of liver
function. The results show that Phosphogliv inclusion into therapy improved the
state of patients with psoriatic arthritis. The results of the present study also
indicate principal possibility of broadening of clinical use of this drug. Its
positive effects are based on membrane reparative properties of polyunsaturated
phosphatidylcholine in combination with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulative
effects of its second component, glycyrrhizin acid.

PMID: 16119102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Br J Rheumatol. 1998 Jul;37(7):760-5.

Radiological assessment in psoriatic arthritis.

Rahman P(1), Gladman DD, Cook RJ, Zhou Y, Young G, Salonen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Institute of Medical Sciences, University of
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Our objective was to compare the reliability and responsiveness of the original
Steinbrocker's (OS), our modified Steinbrocker's (MS) and Larsen's (L)
radiological scoring methods for detecting radiological change in psoriatic
arthritis over time. Two sets of radiographs of the hands and feet at least 2 yr 
apart were selected from 68 patients. Films were randomly presented and scored
independently by a rheumatologist (DDG) and a radiologist (DS), in a blinded
fashion using all methods. The index of reliability was the intraclass
coefficient (ICC) and the responsiveness was assessed using plots and regression 
analyses. All three radiological scoring methods have excellent interobserver and
good intra-observer reliability. L and MS are equally responsive and superior to 
OS in detecting change in joint damage over time. Thus, the L or MS radiological 
scoring methods can be used to monitor disease progression in psoriatic
arthritis.

PMID: 9714353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Int Med Res. 1986;14(1):13-8.

A long-term study of flurbiprofen in rheumatological disorders: III. Other
articular conditions.

Busson M.

A total of 336 patients with ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthropathy or
miscellaneous articular disorders were evaluated over 12 months as part of an
open, out-patient, multicentre study in the United Kingdom of the efficacy and
safety of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) flurbiprofen (Froben) 
in a total of 1,396 patients with a variety of rheumatological disorders.
Significant improvements in pain were found for patients in all groups from the
second week onwards, for up to 6 months in those with ankylosing spondylitis, and
for up to 12 months of treatment for those with psoriatic arthropathy or other
articular conditions. Global assessments of progress in patients taking
flurbiprofen in the therapeutic range of 150-400 mg daily for a minimum of 6
months were recorded by doctor and patient. Improvement of patients in all groups
reached statistical significance after 1 month's treatment and remained
significant at 12 months. The incidence of side-effect reporting over-all was
17.2%, being higher in men than in women in the group receiving no concomitant
therapy and doubling in patients receiving NSAIDs in addition to flurbiprofen.
Side-effects were similar in nature to those of other drugs in this group.

PMID: 3514311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Ann Rheum Dis. 2001 Mar;60(3):214-7.

Methotrexate and early postoperative complications in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis undergoing elective orthopaedic surgery.

Grennan DM(1), Gray J, Loudon J, Fear S.

Author information: 
(1)Wrightington Hospital NHS Trust, Hall Lane, Appley Bridge, Wigan WN6 9EP, UK.

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2002 Jan;61(1):86-7.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether continued methotrexate treatment increases the
risk of postoperative infections or of surgical complications in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) within one year of elective orthopaedic surgery.
DESIGN: A prospective randomised study of postoperative infection or surgical
complications occurring within one year of surgery in patients with RA who
underwent elective orthopaedic surgery.
SUBJECTS: 388 patients with RA who were to undergo elective orthopaedic surgery. 
Patients who were receiving methotrexate were randomly allocated to groups who
either continued methotrexate (group A) or who discontinued methotrexate from two
weeks before surgery until two weeks after surgery (group B). Their complication 
rates were compared with complications occurring in 228 patients with RA (group
C) who were not receiving methotrexate and who also underwent elective
orthopaedic surgery.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Signs of postoperative infection were recorded, including 
rubor, discharge, systemic infection, and frequency of wound dehiscence as well
as the incidence of any surgical complication requiring a secondary revision
procedure that occurred within one year of surgery. The frequencies of flare up
activity of RA at six weeks and six months after surgery were also recorded. A
flare of rheumatoid disease was defined as an increase in joint pain in two or
more joints notified by the patient as well as by an increase in articular index 
of at least 25% after surgery.
RESULTS: Signs of infection or surgical complications occurred in two of 88
procedures in group A (2%), 11 of 72 procedures in group B (15%), and 24 of 228
(10.5%) procedures in group C. The surgical complication or infection frequency
in group A was less than that in either group B (p<0.003) or group C (p=0.026).
At six weeks after surgery there were no flares in group A, six flares in group B
(8%), and six flares in group C (2.6%). Logistic regression analysis of the
overall surgical complication rate in all the patients with RA studied showed
that methotrexate, whether continued or discontinued before surgery, did not
increase the early complication rate in the patients with RA who underwent
elective orthopaedic surgery. Other drugs-penicillamine, indometacin,
cyclosporin, hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and prednisolone-all did
significantly increase the risk of infection or surgical complication after
elective orthopaedic surgery. The risk of surgery was also increased in the
presence of intercurrent chronic diseases-diabetes, hypertension, bronchiectasis,
psoriasis, asthma, and ischaemic heart disease.
CONCLUSION: Continuation of methotrexate treatment does not increase the risk of 
either infections or of surgical complications occurring in patients with RA
within one year of elective orthopaedic surgery. Thus methotrexate treatment
should not be stopped in patients whose disease is controlled by the drug before 
elective orthopaedic surgery.

PMCID: PMC1753573
PMID: 11171680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Dec;37(3):164-73. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

A comparison of the efficacy and safety of celecoxib 200 mg and celecoxib 400 mg 
once daily in treating the signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis.

Kivitz AJ(1), Espinoza LR, Sherrer YR, Liu-Dumaw M, West CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Altoona Center for Clinical Research,
Duncansville, PA, USA. akivitz@prodigy.net

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of the cyclooxygenase-2 selective inhibitor
celecoxib in treating patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in flare.
METHODS: This 12-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group study compared the efficacy and safety of
celecoxib 400 mg (n=201) or celecoxib 200 mg (n=213) once daily (qd) with placebo
(n=194) in treating the signs and symptoms of PsA in flare. The primary efficacy 
measure was the number of patients responding to treatment according to the
American College of Rheumatology Responders Index 20% (ACR-20) at week 12.
Efficacy and safety were assessed for all randomized patients who received at
least 1 dose of study medication.
RESULTS: At the week-12 primary endpoint, approximately 50% of patients in each
treatment group were responders according to the ACR-20 criteria, and no
statistically significant treatment differences between treatment groups were
observed. However, at week 2, the ACR-20 response rates for the celecoxib 400 mg 
(49%) and 200 mg (39%) groups were significantly higher than for the placebo
group (28%) (P<0.001 and P=0.016, respectively). Within the celecoxib 400 mg
group, ACR-20 response rates were similar at weeks 2, 6 (46%), and 12 (49%). In
contrast, in the celecoxib 200 mg and placebo treatment groups, ACR-20 response
rates increased 7 and 16%, respectively, from week 2 to week 6, and remained
relatively unchanged from week 6 to week 12. There were no statistically
significant differences in ACR-20 response rates between the celecoxib 400 mg and
200 mg groups at any time point. Treatment with celecoxib 200 and 400 mg qd was
statistically superior to placebo treatment at weeks 2 and 6 for Patient's
Assessment of Arthritis Pain. Both doses of celecoxib were well tolerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Celecoxib 400 mg and 200 mg qd were efficacious and well tolerated
in treating the signs and symptoms of PsA in flare after 2 weeks of treatment.
However, although the clinical effects of celecoxib 400 mg and 200 mg qd were
observed for 12 weeks, there was a high placebo response at these time points,
and there were no differences relative to placebo treatment at week 12.

PMID: 17570469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 1983 May;12(4):333-47.

Low dose oral methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis: an uncontrolled trial and
review of the literature.

Groff GD, Shenberger KN, Wilke WS, Taylor TH.

New therapeutic alternatives are needed for patients with progressive RA
unresponsive to gold or D-penicillamine. Azathioprine and cyclophosphamide can be
effective but have been linked with the development of lymphoreticular
malignancies. In an effort to exploit a less toxic agent, we have been impressed 
by the results and minimal toxicity of low dose oral MTX. Extensive application
of this regimen in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis indicates that low dose MTX 
does not have an unusual risk for developing cancer. In addition, prior
experience with other rheumatic disorders and preliminary studies on the
mechanism of action suggest a potential value in RA. We present our initial
retrospective results in 28 patients with refractory RA given low dose oral MTX
over the past 2.5 yr. An apparent positive response was noted in 19 of these
patients (67%) and is similar to the experience of other clinicians. At the same 
time, the toxicity has been low and, with one exception, amenable to dose
modification. Methotrexate in various regimens is being increasingly employed in 
refractory RA. Issues concerning the pharmacology and potential toxicity are,
therefore, important. These topics are reviewed with emphasis on low dose therapy
and hepatotoxicity. Despite the encouraging preliminary results it is unclear
whether MTX can prevent erosions or improve long-term function and quality of
life in RA. There are still no controlled perspective studies comparing MTX to
placebo or other immunosuppressive agents in RA. Although short-term toxicity is 
low, long-term toxicity, especially hepatic, is uncertain. As a result, a
controlled, long-term prospective study is necessary.

PMID: 6348949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Reumatismo. 2009 Apr-Jun;61(2):125-31.

[Long-term survival of methotrexate in psoriatic arthritis].

[Article in Italian]

Ricci M(1), De Marco G, Desiati F, Mazzocchi D, Rotunno L, Battafarano N,
Marchesoni A.

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Day Hospital di Reumatologia, Istituto Ortopedico Gaetano Pini, Milano,
Italia. massiminor@alice.it

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term survival rate 
of Methotrexate (MTX) in the peripheral joint involvement of psoriatic arthritis 
(PsA) in a setting of everyday clinical practice.
METHODS: This was an observational restrospective study performed using the data 
from a dermatological-rheumatological PsA clinic. All of the patients evaluated
at this clinic from March 1997 to December 2007 who were started on MTX alone,
had a three-year follow-up time or had discontinued the therapy were included
into the survey.
RESULTS: Of the 174 evaluable patients, 104 (59.8%) were still taking MTX after
three years of treatment. The reasons of therapy discontinuation in the remaining
70 (40.2%) patients were: 34 (19.5%) lost-to-follow-up, 18 (10.3%) adverse
events, 14 (8%) inefficacies, and 4 (2.3%) deaths (none related to the therapy). 
MTX was effective in controlling joint inflammation but not in preventing their
deterioration. Overall, adverse events were recorded in 43 patients (36.4% of the
114 patients with a three-year follow-up). No serious side effect occurred in the
study population.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study showed that, in a setting of clinical
pratice, MTX had a good three-year performance in patients with peripheral PsA.
Almost 60% of them were still taking this drug at the end of the study period and
the toxicity was more than acceptable. In our opinion, MTX might be considered
the non-biological DMARD of choice for the treatment of this condition. However
it should be used earlier and at higher doses.

PMID: 19633799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Rheumatol. 2006 Nov;33(11):2254-9. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Effect of infliximab therapy on employment, time lost from work, and productivity
in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Kavanaugh A(1), Antoni C, Mease P, Gladman D, Yan S, Bala M, Zhou B, Dooley LT,
Beutler A, Guzzo C, Krueger GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California at 
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of infliximab on employment status, time lost
from work, and productivity in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of
patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Two hundred adult patients with PsA were randomized to intravenous
infusions of either infliximab 5 mg/kg or placebo at Weeks 0, 2, 6, 14, and 22,
with early escape at Week 16. Employment status, workdays missed, and
productivity were assessed at baseline and at Week 14. The effect of PsA on daily
productivity was assessed using a visual analog scale.
RESULTS: At baseline, similar percentages of patients in both treatment groups
were employed and similar percentages missed workdays; the mean productivity
score at baseline was similar between groups (roughly 3 on a scale of 0 to 10).
At Week 14, median productivity increased significantly in the infliximab group
compared with the placebo group (67.5% vs 9.2%; p < 0.0001). Compared with the
placebo group, higher proportions of patients in the infliximab group improved
employment status from unemployed at baseline to employed at Week 14 (11.5% vs
0%; p = 0.084) and from part-time to full-time employment (30.0% vs 10.0%; p =
0.582). Among patients employed at baseline and Week 14, a lower proportion of
patients in the infliximab group than in the placebo group had missed workdays in
the 4 weeks prior to Week 14 (p = 0.138).
CONCLUSION: After 14 weeks of treatment, infliximab improved productivity in
patients with active PsA. There was also a trend toward increased employment and 
reduced time lost from work for patients treated with infliximab.

PMID: 16960923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Ther Apher Dial. 2006 Jun;10(3):247-56.

Granulocyte and monocyte adsorption apheresis (GCAP) for refractory skin diseases
caused by activated neutrophils and psoriatic arthritis: evidence that GCAP
removes Mac-1-expressing neutrophils.

Kanekura T(1), Hiraishi K, Kawahara K, Maruyama I, Kanzaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima, Japan. takurok@m2.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

In the present study, we have shown that granulocyte and monocyte adsorption
apheresis (GCAP), an extracorporeal apheresis instrument whose column contains
cellulose acetate (CA) beads, is useful for skin diseases attributable to
activated granulocytes and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). We assessed the clinical
effectiveness of GCAP and investigated the mechanisms underlying the adsorption
of pathogenic granulocytes. The effect of GCAP was assessed in 14 patients with
neutrophilic dermatoses and 16 with PsA. The mechanisms by which the instrument
adsorbs activated granulocytes were investigated using an in vitro mini-column
system that mimics the GCAP. Skin lesions and arthropathy improved in 22 of 29
patients (75.9%) and 14 of 18 (77.8%), respectively. Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18)
expression on the peripheral neutrophils, increased compared with normal
subjects, was reduced by GCAP. In the mini-column system, CA beads adsorbed 50%
neutrophils; and adsorption was inhibited significantly by treating plasma with
EDTA and blood cells with antihuman CD11b monoclonal antibody. GCAP was useful
for treating neutrophilic dermatoses and PsA. GCAP adsorbs Mac-1-expressing
neutrophils to the CA beads by the binding of complement component (iC3b) on CA
beads and CD11b expressed on activated neutrophils.

PMID: 16817789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Rheumatol. 2006 Feb;33(2):307-10.

Subjective improvement in patients with psoriatic arthritis after short-term oral
treatment with seal oil. A pilot study with double blind comparison to soy oil.

Madland TM(1), Björkkjaer T, Brunborg LA, Fröyland L, Berstad A, Brun JG.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Rheumatology and Gastroenterology, Institute of Medicine,
University of Bergen, Norway. tor.madland@helse-bergen.no

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2006 Oct;33(10):2099.
    J Rheumatol. 2006 Feb;33(2):210-2.
    J Rheumatol. 2006 Feb;33(2):207-9.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate effects of short-term oral treatment with seal oil in
patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Forty-three patients with polyarticular PsA were randomized to receive
oral treatment for 2 weeks with either seal oil or soy oil in a double blind
controlled trial. Clinical and biochemical variables were assessed at baseline,
after treatment, and 4 weeks post-treatment. Patients were allowed to continue
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID) and disease modifying antirheumatic
drugs (DMARD) during the study.
RESULTS: Forty patients completed the study, 20 in each treatment group. Patients
in the seal oil group reported a significant improvement in global assessment of 
the disease 4 weeks post- treatment (p < 0.01), and both groups showed a trend
toward improvement in tender joint count, but the differences between the groups 
were not significant. There was a fall in the ratio of n-6 to n-3 fatty acids and
in arachidonic acid (AA) to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) in serum after treatment 
with seal oil (p < 0.01). Twenty-one percent of all patients had elevated values 
of calprotectin in feces suggestive of asymptomatic colitis.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with seal oil was followed by a modest improvement in
patient's global assessment of the disease and a trend towards a decrease in
number of tender joints. There was a shift in fatty acid composition in serum
toward a putative antiinflammatory profile. Oral treatment with seal oil may have
NSAID-like effects in PsA.

PMID: 16465662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Aug;65(8):1038-43. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

The Infliximab Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis Controlled Trial (IMPACT):
results of radiographic analyses after 1 year.

Kavanaugh A(1), Antoni CE, Gladman D, Wassenberg S, Zhou B, Beutler A, Keenan G, 
Burmester G, Furst DE, Weisman MH, Kalden JR, Smolen J, van der Heijde D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innovative Therapy, University of California-San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0943, USA. akavanaugh@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: Infliximab is effective in improving signs and symptoms of joint/skin 
involvement, functional status, and quality of life in patients with psoriatic
arthritis (PsA). Using IMPACT trial data, we assessed the effect of infliximab
(IFX) on structural damage in PsA.
METHODS: Patients with active PsA were randomly assigned to receive placebo
(PBO/IFX) or infliximab 5 mg/kg (IFX/IFX) at weeks 0, 2, 6, and 14, with the
primary endpoint at week 16. The PBO group received infliximab loading doses at
weeks 16, 18, and 22. Thereafter, all patients received infliximab 5 mg/kg every 
8 weeks through week 50. Hand/feet radiographs were obtained at weeks 0 and 50.
Total radiographic scores were determined using the PsA modified van der
Heijde-Sharp (vdH-S) score. Projected annual rate of progression was calculated
by dividing x ray score by disease duration (years).
RESULTS: As reported previously, 65% of infliximab treated patients versus 10% of
PBO treated patients achieved an ACR20 response at week 16 (p<0.001). At week 50,
69% of patients achieved an ACR20 response. Radiographs (baseline and week 50)
were available for 72/104 patients. At baseline, estimated mean annual rate of
progression was 5.8 modified vdH-S points/year. Mean (median) changes from
baseline to week 50 in the total modified vdH-S score were -1.95 (-0.50) for
PBO/IFX and -1.52 (-0.50) for IFX/IFX patients (p = NS). At week 50, 85% and 84% 
of patients in the PBO/IFX and IFX/IFX groups had no worsening in the total
modified vdH-S score.
CONCLUSION: Infliximab inhibits radiographic progression in patients with PsA
through week 50.

PMCID: PMC1798249
PMID: 16439444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Rheumatol. 2002 Sep;29(9):1907-13.

Modified anti-CD3 therapy in psoriatic arthritis: a phase I/II clinical trial.

Utset TO(1), Auger JA, Peace D, Zivin RA, Xu D, Jolliffe L, Alegre ML, Bluestone 
JA, Clark MR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, The Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Treatment of autoimmune diseases with therapies that tolerize
pathogenic lymphocytes may obviate the need for longterm global
immunosuppression. In vitro, non-Fc receptor binding derivatives of anti-murine
CD3 monoclonal antibodies tolerize type 1 T cells and stimulate type 2 T cells.
Recently, a humanized non-FcR binding derivative of the anti-human CD3 Mab OKT3, 
huOKT3gamma1(ala-ala), has been described. We hypothesized that this Mab may be
safe and efficacious in the treatment of type 1 T lymphocyte mediated chronic
autoimmune diseases such as psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: In a Phase I/II trial, 7 patients with PsA were treated with escalating 
daily doses of huOKT3gamma1(ala-ala) for 12 to 14 days. Number of tender and
swollen joints and a visual analog pain scale were used to rate disease activity 
at entry and Day 30 and Day 90 after treatment.
RESULTS: At Day 30, 6 of 7 patients had > or = 75% improvement in the number of
inflamed joints and an average 63% improvement on the patient pain scale. Two of 
6 responders had sustained improvement at Day 90. No patient treated with an
initial dose < or = 1 mg had significant side effects, nor did they have
detectable increases in serum cytokines. One patient treated with 4 mg without
escalation developed mild cytokine release symptoms associated with elevation of 
interleukin 10. Transient T cell depletion occurred following treatment with the 
maximum dose of 4 mg, which resolved by Day 30. Antiidiotypic antibodies
developed in 2 patients; however, there was no concurrent decrease in efficacy.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that huOKT3gamma1(ala-ala) may be useful in
treating PsA.

PMID: 12233885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Dec;67(12):1787-90. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.091900.

Intra-articular infliximab in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic
arthritis with monoarthritis resistant to local glucocorticoids. Clinical
efficacy extended to patients on systemic anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha.

Conti F, Ceccarelli F, Priori R, Iagnocco A, Signore A, Valesini G.

PMID: 19005158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Apr;66(4):493-7. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Prediction of major clinical response (ACR50) to infliximab in psoriatic
arthritis refractory to methotrexate.

Gratacós J(1), Casado E, Real J, Torre-Alonso JC.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, University Institute Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Barcelona, and
Rheumatology Department, Monte Naranco Hospital, Oviedo, Spain. jgratacos@cspt.es

OBJECTIVES: To determine the predictive factors of clinical response to
infliximab in patients with refractory psoriatic polyarthritis.
METHODS: A multicentre open study which included 69 patients with psoriatic
polyarthritis refractory to methotrexate (15 mg/week at least for 8 weeks).
Patients were treated with infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks in addition to their 
stable doses of methotrexate. A major clinical response was defined by the ACR50 
at week 38. Logistic regression analysis was performed to analyse which of the
following measures at the start of treatment were associated with an ACR50
response: demographic and clinical characteristics, duration of disease, tender
and swollen joint counts, involvement of large joints (knee or hip, or both),
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C reactive protein (CRP), Health Assessment
Questionnaire disability index, axial involvement, and the presence of erosions
at baseline.
RESULTS: In an intention to treat analysis 30/69 (44%) patients achieved an ACR50
response. In the univariate analysis both the presence of large joint involvement
and severe disability were associated with a poor clinical response. In a
multivariate logistic regression analysis high CRP values were independently
associated with a good therapeutic response (odds ratio (OR)=18.7; 95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.8 to 181.6; p=0.011). In contrast, large joint involvement and
severe disability were associated with a poor response, which reached
significance for large joint involvement (OR=29.3; 95% CI 3.2 to 266.3; p=0.003).
CONCLUSION: A lower disability and, in particular, the absence of large joint
involvement and higher CRP serum levels at the start of infliximab treatment are 
factors that seem to influence the probability of achieving a good therapeutic
response in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1856049
PMID: 17179176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Rheumatol Int. 2007 Feb;27(4):387-93. Epub 2006 Oct 7.

MRI in psoriatic arthritis with hand and foot involvement.

Ghanem N(1), Uhl M, Pache G, Bley T, Walker UA, Langer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University Hospital Freiburg, Hugstetter
Strasse 55, Freiburg, 79106, Germany. gha@mrs1.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Evaluation of MRI-findings in patients with involvement of psoriatic arthritis
(PsA) in small joints in hands and feet. Twenty-five patients with symptomatic
joint involvement were studied by MRI. All patients were found to be positive for
one or more imaging criteria. Soft tissue oedema was identified in 22/25 (88%)
patients. Joint effusion was observed in 23/25 (92%) patients, whereas bone
erosion was seen in 20/25 (80%) patients. Bone marrow oedema was evident in 21/25
(84%) cases. In 12/25 (48%) cases, bone proliferation was noted. Tendon sheath
effusion was present in 17/25 (68%) patients. Contrast enhancement of the synovia
was detected in all patients (n = 25) (100%), whereas adjacent periost was
enhanced in 22/25 (88%) and epiphysial bone marrow in 18/25 (72%) patients. MRI
allows the assessment of PsA-alterations of soft tissue, cartilage, bone, bone
marrow, and adjacent tendon sheath in patients with hand and foot involvement.

PMID: 17028861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2006 Apr;31(2):149-52.

Short-term infliximab therapy improves symptoms of psoriatic arthritis and
decreases concentrations of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein.

Cauza E(1), Hanusch-Enserer U, Frischmuth K, Fabian B, Dunky A, Kostner K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine V, Wilhelminenspital, Vienna, Austria.
edmund.cauza@wienkav.at

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the current study was to evaluate the short-term effects of
anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha (infliximab) therapy on serum cartilage
oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) levels, a possible biomarker of cartilage
destruction.
METHODS: Nine consecutive patients with active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) were
treated with infliximab for 6 weeks. Serum COMP levels were measured and
correlated to pre-established disease activity outcome variables: pain as
assessed by the patient, using the 100 mm visual analogue scale (VAS), duration
of morning stiffness (MGST), swollen joint count (SJC), tender joint count (TJC),
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP).
RESULTS: Significant improvements in MGST, VAS, SJC and TJC values were observed 
after 6 weeks of therapy. Similar significant improvements were demonstrated in
the ACR response rate and in eight (89%) patients the ACR20 was achieved. ESR and
CRP decreased significantly over 6 weeks. Serum COMP levels also decreased
significantly after 6 weeks of treatment (12.99 +/- 1.71 baseline, 10.22 +/- 1.1 
after 6 weeks, P < 0.008).
CONCLUSION: The results of our study suggest that short-term therapy with
infliximab leads to decreased COMP levels in patients with PsA. COMP seems to be 
a good candidate for a biomarker reflecting cartilage response to this treatment 
in PsA patients.

PMID: 16635048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2005 Mar-Apr;23(2):145-51.

Repeated infusions of low-dose infliximab plus methotrexate in psoriatic
arthritis: immediate benefits are not maintained after discontinuation of
infliximab.

Covelli M(1), Scioscia C, Iannone F, Lapadula G.

Author information: 
(1)DIMIMP, University of Bari, Italy. m.covelli@reumbari.uniba.it

OBJECTIVE: To assess the long-term efficacy and tolerability of a therapy
consisting of infliximab at low dosage plus methotrexate in patients with
psoriatic arthritis (PsA). As a second objective, we assessed whether the
improvement obtained after 54 weeks of infliximab could be maintained with
methotrexate alone.
METHODS: A group of 26 patients with peripheral PsA resistant to various DMARDs
were treated with infliximab + methotrexate for 54 weeks.
RESULTS: The clinical response after the induction period was constant and
progressive, with a high percentage of patients achieving an ACR50 response. The 
ESR and CRP values also declined continuously and gradually, but only CRP
returned to normal values. During the follow-up period after 54 weeks, infliximab
was stopped and the improvement obtained lasted for 2-6 months. The secondary end
point was not achieved, and an extension period was designed. Results at 78 weeks
are presented.
CONCLUSIONS: Open questions for treating patients with infliximab and
methotrexate are the schedule and the length of the administration and how to
preserve the improvement obtained after the drug discontinuation.

PMID: 15895882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Rheumatol. 2004 Nov;31(11):2311-2; author reply 2312-3.

The treatment of enthesitis in psoriatic arthritis.

Kumar N, Kay LJ, Walker DJ.

Comment on
    J Rheumatol. 2003 Jul;30(7):1558-60.

PMID: 15536671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Rheumatol. 2004 Jul;31(7):1356-61.

Pneumococcal vaccine response in psoriatic arthritis patients during treatment
with etanercept.

Mease PJ(1), Ritchlin CT, Martin RW, Gottlieb AB, Baumgartner SW, Burge DJ,
Whitmore JB.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Rheumatology Associates, 1101 Madison,. Suite 230, Seattle, WA 98104, 
USA. pmease@nwlink.com

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2004 Jul;31(7):1238-40.

OBJECTIVE: Therapeutics used to treat inflammatory diseases, including psoriatic 
arthritis (PsA), may potentially interfere with normal immune system function.
Immune system function can be assessed by evaluating response to vaccination. We 
assessed the ability of patients with PsA treated with etanercept to produce
antibodies in response to pneumococcal antigen challenge.
METHODS: Patients with PsA (n = 205) were stratified by methotrexate (MTX) use
and randomly assigned to receive either placebo or etanercept 25 mg twice weekly 
by subcutaneous injection. After 4 weeks of treatment with study drug, a
23-valent pneumococcal vaccination was administered. Antibody levels to 5
antigens (9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F) were measured by ELISA before and 4 weeks
after vaccination in 184 patients. The proportion (%) of patients with 2- and
4-fold increases in antibody titers was analyzed.
RESULTS: Patients treated with etanercept or placebo had similar responses to the
vaccine. A 2-fold increase in titer to at least 2 antigens was achieved by 67% of
patients, and a 4-fold increase to at least 2 antigens was achieved by 47% of
patients. Approximately 20% of patients in each group failed to show a 2-fold
response to any antigens. Logistic regression analysis showed MTX use and age
were predictors of a poor response.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with PsA treated with etanercept were able to produce
antibodies in response to pneumococcal vaccination. Patients receiving MTX had
lower mean antibody levels in response to the vaccine. There was no increased
risk of poor response with etanercept treatment given alone or with MTX.

PMID: 15229957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Rev Rhum Engl Ed. 1997 Jan;64(1):22-5.

Prospective study of anterior chest wall involvement in ankylosing spondylitis
and psoriatic arthritis.

Fournié B(1), Boutes A, Dromer C, Sixou L, Le Guennec P, Granel J, Railhac JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Purpan Teaching Hospital, Toulouse, France.

Comment in
    Rev Rhum Engl Ed. 1997 Jun;64(6):436.

A prospective study of anterior chest wall involvement was conducted in 50
ankylosing spondylitis patients and 50 psoriatic arthritis patients in the
absence of palmoplantar pustulosis. All patients underwent a physical
examination, tomograms, and a radionuclide bone scan. Magnetic resonance imaging 
with gadolinium was done in some cases. Half the patients in both groups had
anterior chest wall involvement. Enthesitis was the mechanism of the lesions. The
manubriosternal symphysis and sternocostoclavicular joints were the most common
sites of involvement, although other entheses in the region were affected in some
patients.

PMID: 9051856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Scand Audiol. 1986;15(2):67-71.

A prospective study of high-frequency auditory function in patients receiving
oral neomycin.

Rappaport BZ, Fausti SA, Schechter MA, Frey RH.

Orally administered, neomycin is reported to cause ototoxicity rarely. Most
reports on hearing loss due to oral neomycin have been case studies. One
prospective study of a pediatric sample demonstrated a significant loss of
hearing in the frequency range of 2 to 8 kHz in 9 of 17 children. To our
knowledge there are no published prospective studies on this type with adult
samples and therefore little is known of the true incidence or nature of
ototoxicity from oral neomycin. This prospective study presents the results of
long-term use of oral neomycin in 30 adult subjects. Hearing sensitivity was
serially monitored in the frequency range 250-20,000 Hz. Two of the 30 subjects
subsequently revealed ototoxicity. Thus the results of this investigation suggest
that clinical use of oral neomycin implies relatively little risk of ototoxicity.

PMID: 3092343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nouv Presse Med. 1975 Apr 12;4(15):1133.

[Letter: D penicillamine and psoriatic polyarthritis].

[Article in French]

Roux H, Maestracci D, Recordier AM.

PMID: 1094415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Rheumatol. 2001 Nov;28(11):2395-9.

The effect of low dose methotrexate on bone density.

Cranney AB(1), McKendry RJ, Wells GA, Ooi DS, Kanigsberg ND, Kraag GR, Smith CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Ottawa Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: High dose methotrexate (MTX) has been linked with bone loss in
oncology patients. However, it is unclear whether longterm low dose MTX used in
the treatment of inflammatory arthritis is associated with bone loss. We compared
the effect of low dose MTX on bone density in prospectively recruited patients
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis (Ps/PsA).
METHODS: Thirty RA patients and 30 Ps/PsA patients taking MTX were compared to
controls not taking MTX (30 with RA, 27 Ps/PsA). Bone mineral density (BMD) of
the radius, lumbar spine, trochanter, and femoral neck was measured using Lunar
dual energy x-ray absorptiometry. Student t tests were used to detect differences
in bone density (using Z scores) of the MTX group versus controls for both the RA
and Ps/PsA groups. Analysis of covariance was used to examine for confounders
including disease duration, disease activity, age, and sex.
RESULTS: BMD of the radius/femoral neck/trochanter did not differ significantly
between the MTX treated groups and controls when analyzed by Z scores. The mean
difference between the MTX group and controls of the femoral neck was 0.040 (95% 
CI -0.40, 0.12) and 0.060 (95% CI -0.30, 0.15) for the RA and Ps/PsA groups,
respectively. The absolute BMD of the lumbar spine (L2-L4) was higher in the RA
MTX group than in controls. Analysis of covariance did not reveal an effect of
study group on bone density.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that low dose MTX does not have a negative effect
on bone density, at either cortical or trabecular sites.

PMID: 11708409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Clin Rheumatol. 2008 Jul;27(7):823-6. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

The effectiveness of a traditional therapeutical approach in early psoriatic
arthritis: results of a pilot randomised 6-month trial with methotrexate.

Scarpa R(1), Peluso R, Atteno M, Manguso F, Spanò A, Iervolino S, Di Minno MN,
Costa L, Del Puente A.

Author information: 
(1)Early Psoriatic Arthritis Clinic, Rheumatology Research Unit, University
Federico II of Naples, via Sergio Pansini no. 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.
rscarpa@unina.it

Thirty-five patients with Early Psoriatic Arthritis (EPA) (17 female and 18 male;
mean age 25.6 years) entered this randomised 6-month study. At the enrolment, all
patients were on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) therapy on demand
and were divided in two matched groups (A and B). Group A continued NSAID therapy
at full dosage in the following 3 months and then added methotrexate (MTX) for
another 3 months. Group B was under the combination of NSAID and MTX for the
entire 6-month period. Clinical and laboratory assessment included the count of
tender joints and/or entheses (TJC), the count of swollen joints and/or entheses 
(SJC), patient's global assessment (PGA), physician's global assessment (PhGA),
patient's assessment of pain (VAS), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and
serum concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP). All variables were done at
baseline (T0), at 3 (T3) and at 6 months (T6). In both group A and in group B,
there was a significant improvement of all variables at T3 and T6. However, in
comparison to the patients of group A, patients included in group B showed a more
rapid and marked improvement of TJC and SJC, which was statistically significant 
at T3 (p < 0.05). In contrast, the improvement of PGA, PhGA, VAS, ESR and CRP was
not significantly different between groups. The early use of MTX in EPA patients 
markedly improves TJC and SJC. In fact, at T3, other markers used to quantify EPA
disease activity, in particular PGA, PhGA, VAS, ESR and CRP, did not show
significant differences in EPA patients treated with either NSAIDs or MTX. This
finding suggests an incomplete control under MTX of the pathogenetic process and 
stimulates further interest on early use of other therapeutical approaches
capable of modifying the course of disease.

PMID: 18030515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Arthritis Rheum. 1996 Dec;39(12):2013-20.

Comparison of sulfasalazine and placebo in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis. 
A Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study.

Clegg DO(1), Reda DJ, Mejias E, Cannon GW, Weisman MH, Taylor T, Budiman-Mak E,
Blackburn WD, Vasey FB, Mahowald ML, Cush JJ, Schumacher HR Jr, Silverman SL,
Alepa FP, Luggen ME, Cohen MR, Makkena R, Haakenson CM, Ward RH, Manaster BJ,
Anderson RJ, Ward JR, Henderson WG.

Author information: 
(1)VAMC, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether sulfasalazine (SSZ) at a dosage of 2,000 mg/day
is effective for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis (PsA) resistant to
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug therapy.
METHODS: Two hundred twenty-one patients with PsA were recruited from 15 clinics,
randomized (double-blind) to SSZ or placebo treatment, and followed up for 36
weeks. Treatment response was based on joint pain/ tenderness and swelling scores
and physician and patient global assessments.
RESULTS: Longitudinal analysis revealed a trend favoring SSZ treatment (P =
0.13). At the end of treatment, response rates were 57.8% for SSZ compared with
44.6% for placebo (P = 0.05). The Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate
declined more in the PsA patients taking SSZ than in those taking placebo (P <
0.0001). Adverse reactions were fewer than expected and were mainly due to
nonspecific gastrointestinal complaints, including dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting,
and diarrhea.
CONCLUSION: SSZ at a dosage of 2,000 mg/day is well tolerated and may be more
effective than placebo in the treatment of patients with PsA.

PMID: 8961906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Rheumatol. 2010 May;37(5):1042-8. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090827. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Single-joint outcome measures: preliminary validation of patient-reported
outcomes and physical examination.

Heald AE(1), Fudman EJ, Anklesaria P, Mease PJ; 13G01 Study Team.

Collaborators: Mease PJ, Wei N, Fudman EJ, Kivitz A, Schechtman J, Trapp RG,
Hobbs K, Greenwald M, Hou A, Bookbinder S, Graham G, Wiesenhutter C, Willis L,
Ruderman E, Forstot JZ, Maricic M, Pritchard C, Dao K, Burch F, Fiske D, Prupas
M.

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Genetics Corporation, Seattle, Washington, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the validity, responsiveness, and reliability of
single-joint outcome measures for determining target joint (TJ) response in
patients with inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: Patient-reported outcomes (PRO), consisting of responses to single
questions about TJ global status on a 100-mm visual analog scale (VAS; TJ global 
score), function on a 100-mm VAS (TJ function score), and pain on a 5-point
Likert scale (TJ pain score) were piloted in 66 inflammatory arthritis subjects
in a phase 1/2 clinical study of an intraarticular gene transfer agent and
compared to physical examination measures (TJ swelling, TJ tenderness) and
validated function questionnaires (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand
scale, Rheumatoid Arthritis Outcome Score, and the Health Assessment
Questionnaire). Construct validity was assessed by evaluating the correlation
between the single-joint outcome measures and validated function questionnaires
using Spearman's rank correlation. Responsiveness or sensitivity to change was
assessed through calculating effect size and standardized response means (SRM).
Reliability of physical examination measures was assessed by determining
interobserver agreement.
RESULTS: The single-joint PRO were highly correlated with each other and
correlated well with validated functional measures. The TJ global score exhibited
modest effect size and modest SRM that correlated well with the patient's
assessment of response on a 100-mm VAS. Physical examination measures exhibited
high interrater reliability, but correlated less well with validated functional
measures and the patient's assessment of response.
CONCLUSION: Single-joint PRO, particularly the TJ global score, are simple to
administer and demonstrate construct validity and responsiveness in patients with
inflammatory arthritis. (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT00126724).

PMID: 20231202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Jun;47(6):872-6. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken059.
Epub 2008 Apr 9.

Frequency and duration of clinical remission in patients with peripheral
psoriatic arthritis requiring second-line drugs.

Cantini F(1), Niccoli L, Nannini C, Cassarà E, Pasquetti P, Olivieri I, Salvarani
C.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Medicine-Rheumatology Unit, Hospital of Prato, Piazza
Ospedale,1 - 59100, Prato, Italy. fcantini@usl4.toscana.it

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the frequency and duration of clinical remission in
patients with PsA.
METHODS: All consecutive new outpatients with peripheral PsA requiring
second-line drugs and RA observed between January 2000 and December 2005 were
included in a prospective, case-control study. Primary end point was to assess
the frequency of remission in peripheral PsA compared with RA. Secondary end
points were to compare the duration of clinical remission during treatment and
after therapy interruption, ACR 20, 50, 70 response rates and to detect any
remission predictor at diagnosis. Treatment regimen was standardized in both
groups. From January 2003 to December 2005, therapy was suspended in PsA patients
and controls if achieving remission.
RESULTS: One or more episodes of remission occurred in 57/236 (24.1%) PsA
patients and in 20/268 (7.5%) controls (P < 0.001). The mean duration of
remission was of 13 +/- 9.4 months in PsA patients and 4 +/- 3.7 in controls (P >
0.001). Remission episodes were more frequent in PsA patients treated with
anti-TNF compared with those receiving traditional DMARDs (P > 0.001), with no
differences regarding the duration. After therapy interruption, the remission
duration was 12 +/- 2.4 months in PsA and 3 +/- 1.5 in RA (P < 0.001). No
remission predictor at diagnosis resulted by multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Remission is possible in up to 24% of patients with peripheral PsA.
It is significantly more frequent, but not longer, in patients receiving anti-TNF
drugs compared with those treated with traditional DMARDs. Patients remain in
remission for a long period after therapy interruption, thus suggesting an
intermittent therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 18400836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Reumatismo. 2006 Jan-Mar;58(1):31-8.

[Side effects of anti-TNFalpha therapy in juvenile idiopathic arthritis].

[Article in Italian]

Pontikaki I(1), Gerloni V, Gattinara M, Luriati A, Salmaso A, De Marco G, Teruzzi
B, Valcamonica E, Fantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Semplice di Reumatologia Infantile, Dipartimento e Cattedra di
Reumatologia dell'Università di Milano. pontikaki@tiscalinet.it

OBJECTIVES: To report adverse events registered in our population affected by JIA
and treated with anti-TNFalpha blockers.
METHODS: Ninety-five patients were enrolled to be treated with Etanercept, median
age 14 years (range 4-34); median duration of therapy 12 months (range 1-40). 19 
patients were also treated with MTX (median dose 12.5 mg/week). Fifty-six
patients were enrolled to be treated with Infliximab associated with MTX (median 
dose of MTX 8.8 mg/week), median age 23.2 years (range 7.8-34.9); median duration
of therapy 20.1 months (range 1.4-60.4). All adverse events were divided in
definitely, probably and possibly related to the biologic agent.
RESULTS: Side effects definitely related to Infliximab were the reactions to
infusions and the Anti-dsDNA positivity. Side effects definitely related to
Etanercept were severe headache and thrombocytopenia. Side effects probably
correlated to both the biological agents were behavioural modifications and pain 
amplification syndrome. Probably correlated to the treatment with Etanercept was 
the onset of Crohn's disease in 3 patients. Possibly correlated to the biological
agents were the new onset or flare-up of Chronic Iridocyclitis and single cases
of thyroideal cancer, hypoglossal nerve paralysis and a severe Cytomegalovirus
pulmonary infection. No case of tuberculosis infection was registered during this
study.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with a TNFalpha antagonist seems to be associated with
various adverse events. Some of them, like onset of Crohn's disease, behavioural 
modifications are unusual and others, like pain amplification syndrome were never
described before. Children and young adults affected by JIA should be monitored
very carefully so as to limit as much as possible the risk of serious side
effects on anti-TNFalpha therapy.

PMID: 16639486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Rheumatol. 2005 Nov;32(11):2183-5.

Infliximab to etanercept switch in patients with spondyloarthropathies and
psoriatic arthritis: preliminary data.

Delaunay C(1), Farrenq V, Marini-Portugal A, Cohen JD, Chevalier X, Claudepierre 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Henri Mondor Teaching Hospital, Créteil, France.

OBJECTIVE: To report early experience of switching anti-tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNF-alpha) therapy from infliximab to etanercept in patients with
spondyloarthropathy (SpA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA).
METHODS: Thirteen patients with various SpA (7 with ankylosing spondylitis and 6 
with undifferentiated SpA) and 2 patients with PsA were receiving infliximab.
Because they were experiencing inadequate response or adverse events, therapy was
changed to etanercept. Patients were evaluated for response to the change in
anti-TNF-alpha therapy at baseline, after 3 months, and then every 6 months.
RESULTS: During the mean 10-month followup after the change in therapy, 9 of 13
patients with SpA and both patients with PsA responded to etanercept and none
experienced intolerance to this agent.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that switching between anti-TNF-alpha drugs may be
useful for patients with SpA who are unresponsive or intolerant to a first
anti-TNF-alpha agent.

PMID: 16265699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Ter Arkh. 2005;77(8):60-4.

[Psoriatic arthritis: combined treatment with prospidin and methotrexate].

[Article in Russian]

Simonova OV, Nemtsov BF.

AIM: To compare clinical efficacy of methotrexate monotherapy and methotrexate
combination with prospidin in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PA).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty three patients (42 females and 21 males) with
documented PA, generalized articular syndrome of the second-third degree of
activity were divided into two groups. Patients of group 1 (n = 30) received
combined therapy (i.v. prospidin 200-300 mg/week + i.m. methotrexate 10 mg/week).
Maintenance consisted of prospidin in a dose 100-200 mg/week i.m., methotrexate
dose was the same. Patients of group 2 (n = 33) were given methotrexate
monotherapy in a dose 10 mg/ week i.m.
RESULTS: In the first three months of the study and in maintenance therapy,
combined treatment was more effective. By ACR criteria, 50-70% response was
achieved after 12 months of treatment in 44 and 27.3% patients of groups 1 and 2,
respectively. The number of side effects and drug-related withdrawals was 23.3
and 36.4%, 10 and 15.1% in groups 1 and 2, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Combination of methotrexate with prospidin produced an earlier and
more potent positive clinical effect than methotrexate alone in PA patients.

PMID: 16206608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1995 Sep-Oct;13(5):589-93.

Comparison of cyclosporin A and methotrexate in the treatment of psoriatic
arthritis: a one-year prospective study.

Spadaro A(1), Riccieri V, Sili-Scavalli A, Sensi F, Taccari E, Zoppini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness and toxicity of cyclosporin A (CsA) vs
low-dose methotrexate (MTX) over a period of one year in the treatment of
psoriatic arthritis (PsA) with peripheral involvement.
METHODS: Thirty-five patients with PsA were enrolled in a prospective,
controlled, randomized trial. CsA was initially given in doses of 3 mg/kg/day to 
a maximum permitted dose of 5 mg/kg/day; MTX was given in oral doses of 2.5 mg
every 12 hours for 3 consecutive doses each week up to a maximum dose of 15
mg/weekly. Clinical and laboratory evaluations were performed at entry and
monthly thereafter.
RESULTS: After 6 and 12 months the number of painful joints, the number of
swollen joints, the Ritchie index, the duration of morning stiffness, grip
strength, CRP, the patient's and the physician's assessment of PsA activity, as
well as the PASI, were significantly improved in both treatment groups. ESR
values were significantly reduced only in the MTX group (p < 0.01), which also
showed a significantly increase of liver enzymes. The changes in the main
clinical and laboratory parameters during the course of CsA or MTX treatment were
not significantly different except for the AST and ALT levels (p < 0.05). After
one year of therapy CsA and MTX were withdrawn in 41.2% and 27.8% of the patients
respectively, but these differences were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Our one-year prospective trial shows that low-dose CsA and MTX are
both effective in the treatment of PsA, but the differences in the tolerability
of these drugs must be considered at the start of therapy.

PMID: 8575136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Br J Rheumatol. 1993 Oct;32(10):923-5.

Sulphasalazine in the management of psoriatic arthritis.

Fraser SM(1), Hopkins R, Hunter JA, Neumann V, Capell HA, Bird HA.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medicine, Glasgow Royal Infirmary.

There are few 'second-line' drugs available for the treatment of PSA and their
use is often limited by toxicity. Thirty-nine patients with active PSA recruited 
from two rheumatology units were randomly allocated to either enteric-coated
sulphasalazine (SASP) or placebo and followed for 24 wk. Six patients in the SASP
group and 11 on placebo discontinued therapy before 24 wk. Evaluation of effect
of treatment revealed significant improvements in articular index in both groups 
at 12 wk. By 24 wk the articular index in placebo group was still showing
benefit. In addition to articular index the SASP group improved significantly in 
terms of visual analogue scale, duration of morning stiffness and ESR. SASP is
effective in PSA but the partial clinical response to placebo indicates the
importance of placebo-controlled studies in this variable disease.

PMID: 8104656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Rheumatol. 1992 Jun;19(6):872-7.

Psoriatic arthritis: clinical response and side effects to methotrexate therapy.

Espinoza LR(1), Zakraoui L, Espinoza CG, Gutiérrez F, Jara LJ, Silveira LH,
Cuéllar ML, Martínez-Osuna P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New
Orleans.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 1993 Oct;20(10):1804-5.

In the last decade, methotrexate (MTX) has emerged as a useful second line agent 
for a variety of arthritides. However, there still exists some reluctance for its
wider use mainly because of concerns about its liver side effects. We describe
our clinical experience with this drug in psoriatic arthritis (PsA). The study
group included 24 men and 16 women, with a mean age of 47 years (16-75), with
oligoarticular (13) or polyarticular (27) involvement, with a mean disease
duration of 12 years (1-36). Patients received a mean dose of 11.2 mg of MTX
orally/week during a mean period of 34 months (6-132). Seven had been previously 
treated with other second line agents. Thirty-eight patients had an excellent or 
good response. In them, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate dropped in a mean of
38 mm/h. Only 2 patients had a rather poor response. Two patients discontinued
the medication because of side effects: leukopenia in one and stomatitis in the
other. Eleven patients presented with liver test abnormalities: 3 mild, 6
moderate and 2 severe. Seven patients had 11 liver biopsies. Except for one, none
had evidence of cirrhosis or inflammation. Indeed, no changes were observed in
the histopathology in those with repeated biopsies. The case reported as
cirrhosis occurred very early in the course of MTX therapy. He continued taking
MTX treatment without further deterioration of liver chemistry and/or histology. 
It is concluded that MTX is an effective and safe agent in PsA. Results also
indicate that it is not necessary to perform liver biopsies on a routine basis.

PMID: 1404123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Acta Odontol Scand. 1990 Aug;48(4):271-7.

Comparison of three radiographic methods in screening of temporomandibular joint 
involvement in patients with psoriatic arthritis.

Könönen M(1), Kilpinen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Fifty-three randomly selected subjects with psoriatic arthritis (PA) were
examined radiographically by means of orthopantomography, transcranial
radiography, and transmaxillary radiography. Two examiners graded the
radiographic signs of flattening, osteophytes, erosion, and sclerosis. The
findings obtained were then compared, to determine the best technique for
screening of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) bone changes. Together the techniques 
showed definite (24%) and possible (6%) changes suggesting TMJ involvement in 31 
(30%) of 106 joints. In all projections radiographic signs suggesting TMJ
involvement were most frequent in the condyle. Erosion in the condyle was the
most frequent finding. Agreement with regard to definite changes in the condyle
was found in only one-third to half of the cases. It is concluded that in
radiography of the TMJ in subjects with PA a combination of radiographic
techniques should be used to obtain maximum information. However,
orthopantomography is well suited for screening of TMJ involvement in subjects
with PA.

PMID: 2220335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Rheumatol. 2001 Mar;28(3):682-3.

Termination of disease modifying antirheumatic drugs in psoriatic arthritis.

Ujfalussy I, Koó E, Seszták M.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2002 Apr;29(4):860-1.

Comment on
    J Rheumatol. 2000 Aug;27(8):1922-7.

PMID: 11296986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Clin Rheumatol. 1998;17(1):83-5.

Soluble interleukin-2 receptor and interleukin-6 levels: evaluation during
cyclosporin A and methotrexate treatment in psoriatic arthritis.

Spadaro A(1), Taccari E, Sensi F, Riccieri V, Sili Scavalli A, Zoppini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

PMID: 9586691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Ter Arkh. 1992;64(5):54-9.

[The comparative efficacy of slow-acting (basic) preparations in psoriatic
arthritis].

[Article in Russian]

Burdeĭnyĭ AP, Agababova ER, Korotaeva TV, Kharamil'o LF.

Overall 126 patients with verified and clinically active psoriatic arthritis (PA)
were subjected to a randomized study of the efficacy of chrisanolum (Chr),
sulfasalicylic drugs (SSD) (sulfasalazine and salazopyridazine) and methotrexate 
(MT) as compared to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID). The treatment
that lasted for a year was completed by 77 patients: in the group on NSAID, by
31, on Chr by 15, on SSD by 15, and on MT by 16. In the remainder, the treatment 
was discontinued because of side effects. The best clinical effect was recorded
in patients on Chr. The improvement was observed in 73% of the patients, with a
significant effect being attained in 60%. In the groups on SSD and MT, the
improvement was observed in 80 and 69%, respectively. However, noticeable
improvement was only recorded in 20 and 19%. SSD turned out more effective than
MT. in the group on NAID, the improvement was ascertained but in 35% of the
patients, with noticeable one being attained in 6%. According to Pearson's
criterion chi 2, the results of the treatment with NAID alone were less potent
than in the group given Chr (p < 0.001) and SSD (p < 0.05). The differences
between the effect of the treatment with NAID and MT appeared nonsignificant (p >
0.1). Therefore, according to the diminution of the clinical efficacy in PA, the 
basic drugs may be distributed in the following way: Chr, SSD, MT. The
side-effects in the group on NAID were. recorded in 37% of cases, in the group on
Chr in 53%, on SSD in 33%, and on MT in 55%. This means that SSD were tolerated
best of all.

PMID: 1360714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Rheumatol. 2006 Dec;33(12):2440-6. Epub 2006 Oct 1.

Modest but sustained increase of serum high density lipoprotein cholesterol
levels in patients with inflammatory arthritides treated with infliximab.

Spanakis E(1), Sidiropoulos P, Papadakis J, Ganotakis E, Katsikas G, Karvounaris 
S, Bizaki A, Kritikos H, Boumpas DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology, and Allergy, University
Hospital, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) is a key cytokine in the pathogenesis 
of chronic inflammatory arthritides, has proatherogenic effects, and may be
positively correlated with impairment of the action of insulin. Patients with
chronic inflammatory arthritides have an increased risk for cardiovascular
diseases. We assessed whether anti-TNF-a treatment modifies the unfavorable lipid
profile induced by chronic inflammatory arthritides.
METHODS: Sixty patients (24 with rheumatoid arthritis, 26 ankylosing spondylitis,
and 10 psoriatic arthritis) receiving infliximab because of ongoing disease
activity despite disease modifying drugs (DMARD) were prospectively studied for 6
months. Lipid profile, total cholesterol/high density lipoprotein cholesterol
(TC/HDL-C), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C)/HDL-C ratios, as well
as disease activity indices (DAS28 and BASDAI), were assessed.
RESULTS: A sustained increase of serum HDL-C was observed [mean increase (95%
CI)] 5 (3-7) mg/dl, 3.5 (1-6) mg/dl, and 3 (1-5) mg/dl at 1, 3, and 6 months,
respectively (p < 0.01). Compared to nonresponders, HDL-C increased significantly
more in EULAR or BASDAI responders (0.8 vs 5.8 mg/dl; p = 0.05). Serum TC was
significantly increased [11 (4-8) mg/dl; p = 0.001] only after the first month of
treatment. TC/HDL-C and LDL-C/HDL-C decreased only after the first month [0.3
(0.1-0.4), p < 0.01, and 0.2 (0.1-0.4), p < 0.01, respectively]. For patients
with baseline LDL-C > 130 mg/dl, LDL-C/HDL-C decreased (p < 0.05) during the
whole study period and TC/HDL-C decreased (p < 0.05) at 1 and 3 months.
CONCLUSION: Anti-TNF-a treatment in patients with chronic inflammatory
arthritides induces a modest, but sustained, increase in serum HDL-C levels,
which may have a favorable effect in reducing the cardiovascular risk in these
patients.

PMID: 17014005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Ann Rheum Dis. 2006 Oct;65(10):1286-92. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Pretreatment macrophage infiltration of the synovium predicts the clinical effect
of both radiation synovectomy and intra-articular glucocorticoids.

Jahangier ZN(1), Jacobs JW, Kraan MC, Wenting MJ, Smeets TJ, Bijlsma JW, Lafeber 
FP, Tak PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, F02.127, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands.
njahangier@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore whether pretreatment features of synovial tissue in
patients with gonarthritis could predict the clinical effect of radiation
synovectomy with yttrium-90 (90Y) and glucocorticoids or with intra-articular
glucocorticoids alone.
METHODS: A synovial biopsy was carried out blindly 2 weeks before treatment in 66
patients with persistent gonarthritis, who were randomised to treatment either
with 90Y and triamcinolone or with placebo and triamcinolone.
Immunohistochemistry was used to detect T cells, macrophages, B cells, plasma
cells, fibroblast-like synoviocytes, adhesion molecules and pro-inflammatory
cytokines. Stained sections were evaluated by digital image analysis. Individual 
patient improvement was expressed using a composite change index (CCI; range
0-12). Successful treatment was defined as CCI > or = 6 after 6 months.
RESULTS: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
undifferentiated arthritis and other causes of gonarthritis were included. The
overall response rate was 47%. Clinical efficacy in both therapeutic groups was
similar and not dependent on diagnosis. No significant differences were noted
between baseline microscopic features of synovial tissue inflammation in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis and in those with non-rheumatoid arthritis (ie, all
diagnoses other than rheumatoid arthritis). The number of macrophages in the
synovial sublining was significantly higher in responders than in non-responders 
(p = 0.002), independent of treatment group and diagnosis. The clinical effect
was positively correlated with pretreatment total macrophage numbers (r = 0.28; p
= 0.03), sublining macrophage numbers (r = 0.34; p = 0.005) and vascular cell
adhesion molecule 1 expression (r = 0.25; p = 0.04).
CONCLUSION: The observations support the view that intra-articular treatment
either with 90Y and glucocorticoids or with glucocorticoids alone is especially
successful in patients with marked synovial inflammation.

PMCID: PMC1798328
PMID: 16627543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1990 May 26;120(21):772-86.

[Cyclosporin in autoimmune diseases].

[Article in German]

Frey FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Inselspital Bern.

The efficacy of cyclosporine (Sandimmun) is well established in the field of
organ transplantation. More recently, prospective controlled trials were
performed in patients with other diseases. The efficacy of cyclosporine for the
following clinical entities was proven by the trials: endogenous uveitis,
rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren's syndrome, myasthenia gravis, psoriasis and
Crohn's disease. Furthermore, there is evidence from a controlled trial of some
benefit for patients with aplastic anemia. The proteinuria of patients with
glomerulonephritis was reduced by cyclosporine, though no improvement in
glomerular filtration rate was observed. Large controlled trials in patients with
multiple sclerosis or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis revealed a beneficial effect 
on some clinical parameters. Nevertheless, cyclosporine cannot be recommended for
these patients at the present time, since the ratio between the (slight)
beneficial effects and the side effects was unfavourable. In patients with
primary biliary cirrhosis, cholestasis slightly diminished after the
administration of cyclosporine. Whether this improvement in laboratory parameters
predicts an improved outcome in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis has yet
to be demonstrated. Some patients with recently diagnosed insulin dependent
diabetes needed no further insulin therapy as long as cyclosporine was
administered. This is an observation of tremendous potential practical relevance 
for the future, when methodology may be available for diagnosing autoimmune
destruction of beta-cells before clinically overt diabetes is present.
Cyclosporine combined with prednisone was slightly more efficacious in patients
with Graves' ophthalmopathy than prednisone alone. For all other autoimmune
diseases, no controlled studies with cyclosporine are available at the present
time. The most important side effects of cyclosporine are renal dysfunction,
hypertension, gout, tremor, gingival hyperplasia and hypertrichosis. These side
effects are manageable by appropriate dosage of cyclosporine and prophylactic
measures. Side effects caused interruption of cyclosporine therapy in less than
5% of the patients. Thus, cyclosporine appears to be an efficacious new agent for
treatment of some groups of patient with immune diseases.

PMID: 2190313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2006 Jun;2(6):300-1.

Efficacy and safety of infliximab for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis.

Ritchlin C(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA. 
christopher_ritchlin@urmc.rochester.edu

PMID: 16932707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2002 Jan-Feb;20(1):115.

Etanercept in the treatment of severe, resistant psoriatic arthritis: continued
efficacy and changing patterns of use after two years.

Yazici Y, Erkan D, Lockshin MD.

Comment on
    Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2000 Nov-Dec;18(6):732-4.

PMID: 11892697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1997 Nov-Dec;15(6):609-14.

Life-table analysis of cyclosporin A treatment in psoriatic arthritis: comparison
with other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs.

Spadaro A(1), Taccari E, Mohtadi B, Riccieri V, Sensi F, Zoppini A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the cumulative probability of 
taking CsA in comparison to other DMARDs, as well as the reason for
discontinuation of each DMARD, in a large cohort of PsA patients.
METHODS: We prospectively studied 172 consecutive patients with a diagnosis of
PsA who had been admitted to our rheumatological unit since 1984. We collected
information about treatment with DMARDs including: number, dose, duration and
causes of withdrawal, including side effects or inefficacy. Cumulative survival
analysis was performed by the Kaplan-Meier test and the differences between these
survival curves were determined by the Mantel-Hanszel test.
RESULTS: The probability curve of continuing to take CsA was significantly lower 
than that of MTX (p < 0.046). The rate of adverse effects responsible for
stopping DMARD therapy was higher in the CsA group, especially with respect to
the antimalarial group (p < 0.014). The most common cause of CsA withdrawal was
hypertension. The rate of withdrawal due to inefficacy in the CsA group was not
significantly different from those observed in the other groups. Nevertheless,
the total frequency of discontinuation due to toxicity and inefficacy in the MTX 
group was significantly lower compared to the gold salts (p < 0.05) and CsA
groups (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Life-table analysis suggests that PsA patients taking CsA are less
likely than patients on MTX to continue long term treatment. Therefore CsA, which
seems to be less safe than the antimalarials, could be considered a useful drug
in the treatment of PsA, but does seem to represent the drug of first choice,
particularly when compared to MTX.

PMID: 9444416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Nov;67(11):1650-1. doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.085951.

Life-table analysis of etanercept with or without methotrexate in patients with
psoriatic arthritis.

Spadaro A, Ceccarelli F, Scrivo R, Valesini G.

PMID: 18854519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Sep;64(9):1375-6.

Long term infliximab treatment for severe psoriatic arthritis: evidence of
sustained clinical and radiographic response.

Rinaldi F, Provenzano G, Termini A, Spinello M, La Seta F.

PMCID: PMC1755641
PMID: 16100346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Br J Rheumatol. 1998 Aug;37(8):912.

Modification of the inflammatory activity of psoriatic arthritis in patients
treated with extract of Polipodium leucotomos (Anapsos)

Navarro-Blasco FJ, Sempere JM.

PMID: 9734685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl (Stockh). 1994;186:116-7.

Methotrexate and cyclosporin combined therapy in severe psoriatic arthritis. A
pilot study.

Mazzanti G(1), Coloni L, De Sabbata G, Paladini G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Division of Internal Medicine, Trieste General Hospital, Italy.

PMID: 8073808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Br J Rheumatol. 1992 Jul;31(7):502-4.

Fumaric acid therapy for psoriatic arthritis. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study.

Peeters AJ, Dijkmans BA, van der Schroeff JG.

PMID: 1628175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Arthritis Rheum. 1974 Jan-Feb;17(1):37-45.

Lymphocyte characteristics in rheumatic patients and the effect of azathioprine
therapy.

Yy DT, Clements PJ, Peter JB, Levy J, Paulus HE, Barnett EV.

PMID: 4589815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Joint Bone Spine. 2005 Jan;72(1):48-52.

Autoantibody induction in patients with refractory spondyloarthropathy treated
with infliximab and methotrexate.

Sellam J(1), Allanore Y, Batteux F, Deslandre CJ, Weill B, Kahan A.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Department A, Paris V University, Cochin Teaching Hospital,
AP-HP, 27, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Induction of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) has been reported in
patients taking infliximab to treat refractory spondyloarthropathy, without
concomitant methotrexate therapy. We investigated antibody induction in patients 
with spondyloarthropathy treated with both infliximab and methotrexate.
METHODS: In 33 patients meeting ESSG criteria for spondyloarthropathy, infliximab
was given (infusions at weeks 0, 2, 6, 14, 22, and 30) in combination with
methotrexate (10-25 mg/week). At baseline, 6 and 30 weeks after treatment
initiation, the patients underwent indirect immunofluorescence testing for ANA
and ELISAs for antibodies to double-stranded DNA, soluble nuclear antigens, and
histones.
RESULTS: As compared to baseline, significant increases were found at week 30 in 
the number of patients with ANA (4% vs. 29%, P = 0.02), IgG antihistone
antibodies (7% vs. 29%, P = 0.04), and IgM antihistone antibodies (29% vs. 57%, P
= 0.03). No significant increases were noted for antibodies to double-stranded
DNA or to soluble nuclear antigens. No cases of clinical lupus syndrome were
recorded.
CONCLUSION: Autoantibody induction was far less common in our patients than in
the population studied by De Rycke et al. [Arthritis Rheum. 48 (2003) 1015], who 
found ANA in 88.6% and antibodies to double-stranded DNA in 17.1% of 35 patients 
taking infliximab without methotrexate. Methotrexate may reduce the risk of
autoantibody induction and disimmunity associated with infliximab therapy.

PMID: 15681248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Ter Arkh. 1985;57(8):57-9.

[Experience with using a new antirheumatic drug flugalin].

[Article in Russian]

Sigidin IaA, Murav'ev IuV.

PMID: 3906996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2000 Jun;29(6):379-84.

Sonographic imaging of the distal phalanx.

Grassi W(1), Filippucci E, Farina A, Cervini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University of Ancona, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential role of ultrasonography (US) with very
high frequency transducers in assessing distal phalanx involvement in some
rheumatic diseases.
METHODS: We performed sonographic evaluation with an Esaote AU-4 Idea (Esaote
Biomedica, Genoa, Italy) equipped with a 13-MHz linear transducer. The images
were obtained in asymptomatic healthy subjects and representative patients with
psoriatic arthritis, osteoarthritis of the distal interphalangeal joint
(Heberden's nodes), erosive osteoarthritis, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic 
sclerosis, and posttraumatic synovial cyst.
RESULTS: US with very high frequency transducers allowed a careful identification
of the following anatomic details: joint space, extensor and flexor tendons, bone
margin, periarticular and peritendinous soft tissues, nail, and blood vessels.
Several pathological changes were depicted in different rheumatic disorders.
These included joint space widening, tendon sheath widening, dislocation of the
joint surfaces, irregularity of the bone margin, and urate and calcium deposits
within periarticular soft tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Very high frequency US is able to depict the anatomic substrate of
distal phalanx involvement in several rheumatic diseases, adding useful
information to clinical examination of the hand.

PMID: 10924024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012 Oct;11(10):1224-6.

Apremilast for discoid lupus erythematosus: results of a phase 2, open-label,
single-arm, pilot study.

De Souza A(1), Strober BE, Merola JF, Oliver S, Franks AG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, The Ronald O. Perelman Department of
Dermatology, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a chronic inflammatory disorder 
mediated by Th1 cells. Apremilast is a novel oral PDE4 enzyme inhibitor capable
of blocking leukocyte production of IL-12, IL-23, TNF-a, INF- with subsequent
suppression of Th1 and Th17-mediated immune responses, and proven clinical
efficacy for psoriasis as well as rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis.
OBSERVATIONS: Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus Disease Area and Severity Index
(CLASI) showed a significant (P<0.05) decrease after 85 days of treatment with
apremilast 20 mg twice daily in 8 patients with active discoid lupus. The adverse
events related to the drug were mild and transient.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first open label study to use apremilast as a treatment 
modality for discoid lupus. Our observations indicate that apremilast may
constitute a safe and effective therapeutic option for DLE.

PMID: 23134988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Ann Rheum Dis. 1971 Mar;30(2):180-2.

Radioactive yttrium in the treatment of rheumatoid knee effusions. Preliminary
evaluation.

Bridgman JF, Bruckner F, Bleehen NM.

PMCID: PMC1005747
PMID: 5569439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Am J Med. 1983 Oct 31;75(4B):19-25.

Reappraisal of the use of methotrexate in rheumatic disease.

Willkens RF.

Methotrexate has been available for clinical use since 1951. Initially, it was
utilized as a chemotherapeutic agent, but it has since been widely used in the
treatment of such nonmalignant disorders as psoriasis and, more recently,
experimentally in psoriatic arthritis and polymyositis. Its mechanism of action
is imprecisely understood but it appears to involve both anti-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive effects. Controlled pilot studies are underway using
methotrexate in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis.

PMID: 6356904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Trans Ophthalmol Soc U K. 1965;85:53-8.

Indomethacin in the treatment of uveitis. A double-blind trial.

Perkins ES, MacFaul PA.

PMID: 5335698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ann Rheum Dis. 1966 Nov;25(6 Suppl):634-42. doi: 10.1136/ard.25.Suppl_6.634.

Treatment of gout with allopurinol and sulphinpyrazone in combination and with
allopurinol alone.

Kuzell WC, Seebach LM, Glover RP, Jackman AE.

PMCID: PMC2453410
PMID: 5335061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Hautarzt. 1985 Jun;36(6):326-30.

[Therapy of psoriatic osteoarthropathy with EHDP].

[Article in German]

Holzmann H, Thiers G, Altmeyer P, Maul FD, Hör G.

After describing the problems involved in the therapy of psoriatic
osteoarthropathy, we discuss the specific accumulation of EHDP at the site of the
disease. Because of its pharmacological properties, EHDP may have a regulatory
effect on the pathological changes in psoriatic osteoarthropathy. In an open
experiment using 20 patients with psoriatic osteoarthropathy, we evaluated the
influence of EHDP on the extent and seriousness of bone and joint disease. We
carefully studied the case history, laboratory tests, and rheumatological status;
in some cases, bone scintigrams were also carried out. The patients received an
oral dosage of about 20 mg/kg body weight the first 2 months and about 5 mg/kg
from month 3-6. Two-thirds of the patients (n = 12) indicated a decrease in joint
and bone pain, and there was also detectable improvement in the bone scintigrams.
Only one patient noticed a side effect from the therapy. He complained of severe 
itching.

PMID: 3926720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mod Rheumatol. 2006;16(4):206-13.

The clinical application of etanercept in Chinese patients with rheumatic
diseases.

Chou CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy-Immunology-Rheumatology, Veterans General Hospital Taipei,
No. 201, Sec. 2, Shipai Road, Beitou Chiu, Taipei, 112, Taiwan.
ctchou@vghtpe.gov.tw

Over a 2-year period, to evaluate the efficacy and safety of biologic agents,
etanercept (25 mg twice per week, s.c.) was used to treat 57 rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) patients, 9 ankylosing spondylitis (AS) patients, 6 psoriatic arthritis
(PSA) patients, and 4 juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) patients. In addition
to inflammatory arthritis, I have used this tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blocker
in other rheumatic diseases including idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), 
Behçet's disease with intractable oral ulcer, fibromyalgia syndrome, and systemic
lupus erythematosis with intractable pleural effusion and acute lumbar disc
herniation. For RA, after 6 months of etanercept treatment, all the parameters
including number of swollen joints, number of tender joints, disease activity
score, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and global health
status were rapidly improved (P < 0.001 or P < 0.0001). The anticyclic
citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody and rheumatoid factor also
significantly declined. For spondyloarthropathy, it also gave a similar effect as
to RA. Both Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index and Bath
Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index also improved. One of the two cases with 
Behçet's disease with intractable oral ulcer had a long-term remission after
etanercept. The other Behçet's disease patient with oral ulcer and another with
ITP obtained a good response temporarily. The short-term use of etanercept (<3
months) did not bring a significant effect for cases of fibromyalgia syndrome,
pleural effusion, and lumbar disc herniation. In conclusion, a dramatic and rapid
clinical response in different kinds of arthritis patients can be achieved by
etanercept. Moreover, the TNF-alpha inhibitor also can treat other severe
rheumatic-related symptoms. In general, except for a few cases with infection and
two cases with malignancy, etanercept was safe in our arthritis patients. We need
to study a larger number of patients in order to better understand the efficacy
and safety of etanercept.

PMID: 16906369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Xenobiotica. 2011 Dec;41(12):1063-75. doi: 10.3109/00498254.2011.604745. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Disposition, metabolism and mass balance of [(14)C]apremilast following oral
administration.

Hoffmann M(1), Kumar G, Schafer P, Cedzik D, Capone L, Fong KL, Gu Z, Heller D,
Feng H, Surapaneni S, Laskin O, Wu A.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics Department, Celgene, Summit, NJ, USA.
mjhoffman@celgene.com

Apremilast is a novel, orally available small molecule that specifically inhibits
PDE4 and thus modulates multiple pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators, and is
currently under clinical development for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic
arthritis. The pharmacokinetics and disposition of [(14)C]apremilast was
investigated following a single oral dose (20 mg, 100 μCi) to healthy male
subjects. Approximately 58% of the radioactive dose was excreted in urine, while 
faeces contained 39%. Mean C(max), AUC(0-∞) and t(max) values for apremilast in
plasma were 333 ng/mL, 1970 ng*h/mL and 1.5 h. Apremilast was extensively
metabolized via multiple pathways, with unchanged drug representing 45% of the
circulating radioactivity and <7% of the excreted radioactivity. The predominant 
metabolite was O-desmethyl apremilast glucuronide, representing 39% of plasma
radioactivity and 34% of excreted radioactivity. The only other radioactive
components that represented >4% of the excreted radioactivity were O-demethylated
apremilast and its hydrolysis product. Additional minor circulating and excreted 
compounds were formed via O-demethylation, O-deethylation, N-deacetylation,
hydroxylation, glucuronidation and/or hydrolysis. The major metabolites were at
least 50-fold less pharmacologically active than apremilast. Metabolic clearance 
of apremilast was the major route of elimination, while non-enzymatic hydrolysis 
and excretion of unchanged drug were involved to a lesser extent.

PMCID: PMC3231940
PMID: 21859393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Jan;64(1):124-6.

Six months open label trial of leflunomide in active ankylosing spondylitis.

Haibel H(1), Rudwaleit M, Braun J, Sieper J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department I, Rheumatology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany. haibel@zedat.fu-berlin.de

OBJECTIVE: To examine the potential therapeutic effects of leflunomide in
patients with active AS in an open label study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty patients with AS fulfilling the 1984 modified New
York criteria with a Bath AS Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) >3 were given
leflunomide for 6 months. Clinical outcome assessments included disease activity 
(BASDAI), function (BASFI), metrology (BASMI), patient's and physician's global
assessment, peripheral joint assessment, quality of life (SF-36), global pain,
and CRP. Primary end point was a reduction of disease activity as measured by the
BASDAI of >25% at 6 months.
RESULTS: A BASDAI 25% improvement was noted in 5/20 (25%) patients and a BASDAI
50% improvement in 4/20 (20%) patients. The absolute BASDAI did not change
significantly over the 6 month study (4.9 at baseline v 4.3 at week 24, p>0.05). 
Similarly, no significant change was found for the BASFI, BASMI, patient's and
physician's global assessment, SF-36 mental component, and CRP. For the 10
patients with peripheral arthritis, the mean number of inflamed joints was
significantly reduced from 1.7 at baseline to 0.9 at week 12 (p = 0.034) and 0.2 
at week 24 (p = 0.039).
CONCLUSION: In this open study of patients with active AS only those with
peripheral arthritis improved significantly with leflunomide treatment. Axial
symptoms did not improve.

PMCID: PMC1755172
PMID: 15608310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Jun;64(6):899-905. Epub 2004 Nov 26.

Rheumatoid and psoriatic knee synovitis: clinical, grey scale, and power Doppler 
ultrasound assessment of the response to etanercept.

Fiocco U(1), Ferro F, Vezzù M, Cozzi L, Checchetto C, Sfriso P, Botsios C,
Ciprian L, Armellin G, Nardacchione R, Piccoli A, Todesco S, Rubaltelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
University of Padua, Via Giustiniani 2, 35128 Padua, Italy. ugo.fiocco@unipd.it

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)
blockade with etanercept in refractory knee joint synovitis (KJS) in rheumatoid
and psoriatic arthritis, by local and systemic disease activity assessment and
combined grey scale and power Doppler ultrasonographic monitoring.
METHODS: 27 knees affected by rheumatoid KJS (n = 12) and psoriatic KJS (n = 8)
were assessed before receiving treatment and at 3 and 12 months' follow up. Time 
dependent clinical changes in disease activity were monitored by C reactive
protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), global health status (GHS), and
Ritchie (RAI) and knee joint articular (KJAI) indices; synovial changes were
monitored by ultrasonographic and power Doppler indices for grey scale synovial
thickening and for distinct intrasynovial vessel power Doppler flow
configurations (fluid/synovium interface (F/SI-PD) and pannus/cartilage interface
(P/CI-PD)). Interobserver and intraobserver variability of grey scale and power
Doppler ultrasonographic was evaluated. Response to treatment was assessed by
analysis of variance for repeated measures on clinical and ultrasonographic
variables.
RESULTS: Rapid (3 months) reduction in F/SI-PD flow (p<0.001), parallel to
reductions of C reactive protein (p<0.05), ESR (p<0.001), KJAI (p<0.002), RAI,
and GHS (p<0.001), was sustained at 12 months when it was accompanied by
reduction in both synovial thickening and P/CI-PD flow (p<0.001). No differences 
(ANOVA) were noted at baseline or at 12 months in clinical and ultrasonographic
variables between either the rheumatoid or the psoriatic KJS groups.
CONCLUSION: Grey scale and power Doppler ultrasonography are reliable measures of
long term change in rheumatoid and psoriatic KJS disease activity in response to 
anti-TNFalpha treatment with etanercept.

PMCID: PMC1755540
PMID: 15567814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Br J Rheumatol. 1997 Oct;36(10):1113-5.

Neoral--new cyclosporin for old?

Somerville MF(1), Scott DG.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Department, Norfolk & Norwich Health Care NHS Trust, Norwich.

Cyclosporin A is now well established as an effective second-line drug to treat
rheumatoid arthritis. In April 1995, the microemulsion-based formulation of
cyclosporin (Neoral) was introduced based on its increased bioavailability at 'no
extra cost'. There may have been concerns that with increased bioavailability of 
Neoral, some patients might experience increased toxicity, particularly if
transferring from Sandimmun to Neoral at the same dose. We describe our
experience of 51 patients treated with Neoral--39 with rheumatoid arthritis, six 
with psoriatic arthritis and the remainder with a variety of diseases, including 
Behçet's, systemic lupus erythematosus and juvenile chronic arthritis. All
patients continued their other medication including non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs and analgesics. Five continued low dose prednisolone
(average 7.5 mg per day) all patients were monitored for safety and efficacy
throughout their treatment according to standard protocol. Five patients were
enrolled in a study of efficacy and safety where the dose of cyclosporin was
reduced to 2.5 mg/kg/day at the time of conversion, i.e. to Neoral 2.5 mg/kg/day;
19 patients were converted dose for dose, cyclosporin A dose range 2.5-4
mg/kg/day converted to Neoral dose range 2.5-4 mg/kg/day and 27 patients started 
Neoral de novo. We conclude that cyclosporin is a useful disease modifying
anti-rheumatic agent, and our experience suggests that the new formulation,
Neoral, has a similar safety and efficacy profile to the original preparation
(Sandimmun). Neoral was relatively easy to manage and we noted a slight reduction
in dose when compared to Sandimmun. With dose adjustments over 18 months the mean
dose for patients with RA fell from 3.2 to 2.7 mg/kg/day and of the 27 patients
starting Neoral de novo only seven required an increased dose above 2.5 mg/kg/day
in order to establish efficacy.

PMID: 9374930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Rheumatol. 1995 Jun;22(6):1060-4.

Cyclosporin A increases somatomedin C insulin-like growth factor I levels in
chronic rheumatic diseases.

Ferraccioli G(1), Guerra P, Rizzi V, Bartoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, General Hospital, Udine, 
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether anabolic hormones that affect the musculoskeletal
system and active on the immune cells changed during cyclosporin A (CysA)
therapy.
METHODS: We carried out a randomized study of patients with rheumatic disease
attending the outpatient clinic for rheumatic diseases. Twenty-four patients with
chronic arthritis [20 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 4 with psoriatic
arthritis (PsA)] were divided into 2 groups (10 RA, 2 PsA) and randomly given
CysA 5 mg/kg daily or hydroxychloroquine (OH-Chlor) 6 mg/kg daily in divided
doses.
RESULTS: A significant increase of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)
(somatomedin C) levels and of bone Gla protein was shown after 2 months in the
CysA treated group, but not in the OH-Chlor group. A statistically significant
correlation was observed between changes of IGF-I levels and of
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS). This finding was confirmed in a further 
series of 39 patients. No changes were seen in 25 OH-D, 1-25(OH)2-D3 or
parathyroid hormone after CysA.
CONCLUSION: The effects of CysA on IGF-I may explain some of the clinical,
immunologic, and metabolic results during CysA treatment of rheumatic diseases.

PMID: 7674231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Arthritis Rheum. 1995 May;38(5):618-27.

Sulfasalazine in the treatment of spondylarthropathy. A randomized, multicenter, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study.

Dougados M(1), vam der Linden S, Leirisalo-Repo M, Huitfeldt B, Juhlin R, Veys E,
Zeidler H, Kvien TK, Olivieri I, Dijkmans B, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Université René Descartes, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and tolerability of sulfasalazine (SSZ) in the 
treatment of spondylarthropathy.
METHODS: We conducted a 6-month randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind,
multicenter study of patients with spondylarthropathy whose disease had remained 
active despite treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Patients were 
treated with SSZ (3 gm/day) or placebo. The primary efficacy variables were the
physician's and patient's overall assessments, pain, and morning stiffness. End
points were analyzed in the intent-to-treat and completer patient populations;
the time course of effect was analyzed in the completer patient population.
RESULTS: Of the 351 patients enrolled, 263 (75%) completed the 6-month treatment 
period. The withdrawal rates were 35 (20%) and 53 (30%) in the placebo and SSZ
groups, respectively. In the intent-to-treat analysis of end point efficacy, the 
between-treatment difference reached statistical significance only for 1 of the 4
primary outcome variables, the patient's overall assessment of disease activity, 
for which 60% of the patients taking SSZ improved by at least 1 point on a
5-point scale, in contrast to 44% of the patients taking placebo. Laboratory
markers of inflammation also showed statistically significant change in favor of 
SSZ. In subgroup analysis, the most impressive effects were seen in patients with
psoriatic arthritis, both for the 4 primary efficacy variables and for secondary 
efficacy variables such as the number of inflamed joints. Adverse events were
more frequent in the SSZ group than the placebo group, but all were transient or 
reversible after cessation of treatment.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study show that SSZ had greater efficacy than
placebo in the treatment of active spondylarthropathy, notably in patients with
psoriatic arthritis.

PMID: 7748217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2007 Mar-Apr;25(2):301-4.

Advanced magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in patients treated with
TNF-alpha blocking agents.

van der Bijl AE(1), Emmer BJ, Breedveld FC, Middelkoop HA, Jurgens CK, van Buchem
MA, Huizinga TW, van der Grond J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. a.e.van_der_bijl@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Neurological symptoms have been reported in patients treated with
anti-TNF-alpha. In a pilot study we evaluated the effect of anti-TNF-alpha on
cerebral parenchyma using advanced Magnetic Resonance (MR) techniques.
METHODS: Seven patients with a systemic inflammatory disease (5 rheumatoid
arthritis, 2 psoriatic arthritis) had Magnetization Transfer Imaging, Diffusion
Weighted Imaging (DWI) and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) of the brain
before and after administration of anti-TNF-alpha. Four patients were
neuropsychologically evaluated.
RESULTS: After treatment with TNF-alpha blocking agents the Magnetization
Transfer Ratio histogram Peak-heights (MTR-Pht) of the white and gray matter
decreased (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05 respectively). The Apparent Diffusion
Coefficient for the white and gray matter and the metabolite ratios in the
centrum semiovale did not significantly change after therapy. Neuropsychological 
assessment showed no difference before and after anti-TNF-alpha.
CONCLUSION: The decrease of the MTR-Pht after anti-TNF-alpha therapy suggests
loss of parenchyma integrity; however, these changes could not be attributed to
inflammation or demyelination based on our complementary DWI and MRS data. The
decrease of the MTR-Pht did not result in decreased cognitive function.

PMID: 17543158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arthritis Rheum. 1999 Nov;42(11):2325-9.

Comparison of sulfasalazine and placebo for the treatment of axial and peripheral
articular manifestations of the seronegative spondylarthropathies: a Department
of Veterans Affairs cooperative study.

Clegg DO(1), Reda DJ, Abdellatif M.

Author information: 
(1)Salt Lake City Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, and University
of Utah 84132, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if the peripheral articular manifestations of the
seronegative spondylarthropathies (SNSA) respond differently than the axial
manifestations to treatment with sulfasalazine (SSZ).
METHODS: This is a reanalysis of a previously reported series of randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trials comparing the effects of
SSZ, 2,000 mg/day, and placebo on the axial and peripheral articular
manifestations of ankylosing spondylitis (AS), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), and
reactive arthritis (ReA; Reiter's syndrome). Patients were classified as
treatment responders on the basis of meeting predefined improvement criteria in 4
outcome measures: namely, patient and physician global assessments in all
patients, morning stiffness and back pain in patients with axial manifestations, 
and joint pain/tenderness scores and joint swelling scores in patients with
peripheral articular manifestations.
RESULTS: Six hundred nineteen SNSA patients (264 AS, 221 PsA, and 134 ReA) were
studied. One hundred eighty-seven of these patients had only axial manifestations
of their disease, while 432 patients had peripheral articular manifestations. Of 
the patients with axial disease, 40.2% of the SSZ group and 43.3% of the placebo 
group met the predefined response criteria (P = 0.67). Of the peripheral
articular group, 59.0% of the SSZ-treated patients and 42.7% of the
placebo-treated patients showed a response (P = 0.0007).
CONCLUSION: In a large group of affected individuals, the response of SNSA
patients to SSZ appears to be related to the articular manifestations of their
disease. These data demonstrate that the axial and peripheral articular
manifestations of SNSA respond differently to treatment with SSZ. In SNSA
patients with persistently active peripheral arthritis, SSZ is safe, well
tolerated, and effective.

PMID: 10555027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2011 Oct;50(10):1828-37. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker083.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

High-dose etanercept in ankylosing spondylitis: results of a 12-week randomized, 
double blind, controlled multicentre study (LOADET study).

Navarro-Sarabia F(1), Fernández-Sueiro JL, Torre-Alonso JC, Gratacos J, Queiro R,
Gonzalez C, Loza E, Linares L, Zarco P, Juanola X, Román-Ivorra J, Martín-Mola E,
Sanmartí R, Mulero J, Diaz G, Armendáriz Y, Collantes E.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Department, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Avenida Dr
Fedriani 3, 41009 Sevilla, Spain. federico.navarro.sarabia@juntadeandalucia.es

OBJECTIVES: Etanercept 50 mg a week is approved in the treatment of AS.
Increasing the etanercept dose to 100 mg/week improves efficacy in cutaneous
psoriasis, a clinical manifestation related to the spondylarthritis family, while
maintaining its safety profile. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
efficacy and safety of etanercept 100 vs 50 mg/week in patients with AS.
METHODS: Adult patients with AS were randomized to receive etanercept 50 mg twice
a week (biw), or etanercept 50 mg once a week (qw) for 12 weeks. The primary
efficacy endpoint was Ankylosing Spondylitis Assessment Study (ASAS20) response
at Week 12; secondary endpoints included ASAS40, ASAS50, ASAS70 and ASAS5/6
responses, partial remission and quality of life. Safety was assessed until 15
days after the last visit.
RESULTS: A total of 108 patients were randomly selected and treated, 54 in each
arm. At 12 weeks, ASAS20 response was achieved by 34 (71%) out of 48 patients of 
the etanercept 50 mg biw group and by 37 (76%) out of 49 patients of the
etanercept 50 mg qw group (not statistically significant differences). Other
efficacy variables improved significantly over time, but not between treatment
groups. Fifty-six patients experienced at least one adverse event (generally,
infections and infestations, gastrointestinal disorders and injection site
reactions), most of them mild or moderate.
CONCLUSIONS: High-dose (100 mg/week) etanercept in the treatment of AS for 12
weeks is as safe as the standard dose (50 mg/week). However, it does not
significantly increase its efficacy. Trial Registration. Clinicaltrials.gov,
http://clinicaltrials.gov/, NCT00873730.

PMID: 21700683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Am J Med. 2005 May;118(5):552-6.

Treatment of rheumatic inflammatory disease in 25 patients with secondary
amyloidosis using tumor necrosis factor alpha antagonists.

Fernández-Nebro A(1), Tomero E, Ortiz-Santamaría V, Castro MC, Olivé A, de Haro
M, Portales RG, González-Mari MV, Laffón A, García-Vicuña R.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Section, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria,
Universidad de Málaga, 29010 Málaga, Spain. afn@mail.cofaran.es

Erratum in
    Am J Med. 2006 Feb;119(2):191. Garcia-Vicuna, Rosa [corrected to Portales, Rosa
García ].

PMID: 15866260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Ter Arkh. 2010;82(10):41-6.

[The efficacy and safety of infliximab in patients with ankylosing spondylitis:
results of an open-labeled multicenter study].

[Article in Russian]

Bunchuk NV, Rumiantseva OA, Loginova EIu, Bochkova AG, Storozhakov GI, Ettinger
OA, Kosiura SD, Kamalova RG, Valishina LM.

AIM: To evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of the anti-tumor necrosis
factor-alpha infliximab in patients with active ankylosing spondylitis (AS) in a 
54-week multicenter open-label study.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study enrolled 42 patients with AS who continued to
have an active phase of the disease despite that they had received standard
therapy. All but one patient had signs of active spondylitis; peripheral
arthritis was noted in 52%; enthesitis was seen in 79%. Infliximab was
administered in a dose of 5 mg/kg as 2-hour intravenous infusions; the second and
third infusions were injected 2 and 6 weeks after the first one; all further
infusions were used at an interval of 6-8 weeks.
RESULTS: Thirty-three (78.6%) of the 42 patients completed the trial. There was a
considerable, at least 50%, improvement in the ASAS criteria in 84.8% of the
patients who completed the trial. A substantial therapeutic effect was observed
in the majority of patients just a week after the first infusion of infliximab.
There was a statistically improvement in all the analyzed clinical effectiveness 
indicators, including the Bath AS Disease Activity Index (BASDAI); pain became
less in the vertebral column and joints (on an average from 49.6 to 12.4 mm on
the 100-mm visual analog scale); the level of C-reactive protein and the number
of swollen and tender entheses were decreased. The patients' functional capacity 
improved considerably (the Bath AS Functional index (BASFI) decreased on average 
from 59.7 to 16.3 scores). Nine (21.4%) patients were withdrawn from the study
ahead of time: 7 and 2 patients because of adverse reactions (AR) and contact
loss, respectively. The most common ARs were airway infections (13.6%), hepatic
dysfunction (12.0%), and herpes simplex virus infections (10.4%). Four patients
developed the severest ARs (pulmonary tuberculosis, generalized psoriasis-like
dermatitis, pneumonia, and abscess of the epithelial coccygeal tract); the
outcome of all complications was good.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggest that infliximab has a high, rapidly 
occurring and stably preserving efficiency in most patients with active AS. The
frequency and spectrum of ARs corresponded to the available data on the
tolerability of infliximab.

PMID: 21341463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2005 Jul-Aug;23(4):513-6.

Low dose of infliximab is inadequate in most patients with spondylarthropathies.

Sidiropoulos P(1), Kritikos HD, Siakka P, Mamoulaki M, Kouroumali H, Voudouris K,
Boumpas DT.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklio, Greece.

OBJECTIVES: The recommended starting dose for infliximab for ankylosing
spondylitis 5mg/kg is higher than that for rheumatoid arthritis. Because of the
high expense of the drug lower doses may be considered. We report our experience 
with lower initial doses.
METHODS: Thirty patients with active SpA (16 psoriatic arthritis, 12 ankylosing
spondylitis and 2 undifferentiated) received 6 infliximab infusions. Patients had
substantial axial disease (mean BASDAI at baseline 5.5). Concomitant therapy
(methotrexate or prednisolone) remained stable throughout treatment period. The
mean initial dose of infliximab was 3.5 mg/kg/infusion. Clinical efficacy was
assessed by BASDAI. The criterion for dose adjustment was a BASDAI improvement of
less than 50%. The primary end-points were the proportion of patients requiring a
dose adjustment and the percentage of patients achieving 50% improvement in
BASDAI after 6 infusions.
RESULTS: In this cohort, 2 patients discontinued therapy, 1 for pulmonary
infection and 1 for allergic reaction. Twelve patients (40%) showed 50%
improvement in BASDAI between baseline and prior to the 7th infusion, while 15
patients (50%) had an improvement > 2 points. To achieve clinical response the
frequency and/or the dose of infliximab infusions were increased in 63% of
patients. The mean infliximab dose increased from 3.5 mg/kg at the first infusion
to 4.3 mg/kg (p < 0.001) at the 7th infusion, resulting in a cumulative dose at
the end of the study period comparable to the recommended one.
CONCLUSIONS: In the majority of our SpA patients low starting doses of infliximab
required subsequent adjustment. In these patients infliximab should be
administered at the recommended dose of 5mg/kg/infusion.

PMID: 16095121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Clin Rheumatol. 1999;18(6):434-41.

Needle arthroscopy of the knee with synovial biopsy sampling: technical
experience in 150 patients.

Baeten D(1), Van den Bosch F, Elewaut D, Stuer A, Veys EM, De Keyser F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University of Ghent, University Hospital of Ghent,
Belgium. dominique.baeten@rug.ac.be

Needle arthroscopy is an office-based technique allowing direct visualisation of 
the knee cavity and selective sampling of the synovial membrane. We performed
needle arthroscopy in 150 patients with synovitis of the knee (1) to evaluate the
diagnostic potential in early arthritis, (2) to perform therapeutic lavage in
persistent inflammatory synovitis and (3) to assess the balance between technical
feasibility, safety and patient comfort on the one hand, and the relevance of the
obtained macro- and microscopic information for diagnosis and research purposes
on the other. After disinfection of the leg and local anaesthesia of the skin and
joint, a 1.8-2.7 mm needle arthroscope was introduced into the knee. Synovial
fluid was aspirated and lavage of the joint cavity was performed to allow
macroscopic evaluation of hyperaemia and hypertrophy of the synovial membrane.
Biopsies were taken at inflamed sites, followed by another lavage to remove blood
and debris. Needle arthroscopy of the knee is a simple and easy to perform
technique made particularly attractive by the local anaesthesia and the
ambulatory setting. It allows good macroscopic evaluation of synovial
inflammation and selective sampling of the synovial membrane. Biopsies are
suitable for RNA and DNA extraction, bacterial or lymphocyte culture, and cell
isolation. Because samples were sometimes too small for representative histology,
we switched from a 1.8 mm to a 2.7 mm biopsy forceps with good results. In nearly
all cases the arthroscopy was well tolerated. Moreover, some patients reported
relief of symptoms and even improvement of mobility after lavage of the inflamed 
joint. No major complications were noted. It was concluded that needle
arthroscopy of the knee is a simple, safe and well-tolerated technique, with
promising perspectives as a diagnostic, scientific and possibly therapeutic tool 
in rheumatic diseases.

PMID: 10638766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Thyroid. 1995 Apr;5(2):113-6.

Prospective studies of thyroid function in patients receiving gold therapy.

Mandel SJ(1), Brent GA, Weinblatt M, Larsen PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Gold inhibits the Type I deiodinase that provides the bulk of circulating T3 in
humans. We prospectively studied thyroid function in patients receiving
increasing parenteral cumulative gold doses. Eight consecutive euthyroid patients
with rheumatoid or psoriatic arthritis who were initiating intramuscular gold
therapy were enrolled. Serum thyroid hormone levels (total T4, T3, and rT3) and
TSH were measured for each subject at various levels during gold therapy. For
analysis, the free T4 and free T3 indices, TSH concentrations, and T4/T3 ratios
were correlated with cumulative gold dose. Neither individual nor pooled linear
regressions showed a significant correlation between cumulative gold dose and any
of the thyroid function parameters. Thyroid function is not affected in patients 
receiving up to 1500 mg of gold compounds. The most likely explanation for this
is that gold principally accumulates in the Kupffer cells and renal cortex and
these cells do not express Type I deiodinase.

PMID: 7647570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Orthopade. 1998 Jun;27(6):392-5.

[Cementless hip prosthesis in inflammatory rheumatic diseases].

[Article in German]

Lukoschek M(1), Simank HG, Brocai DR.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Orthopädie I, Stiflung Orthopädische Universitätsklinik Heidelberg.

We compared the outcome of cementless hip arthroplasty in patients with chronic
rheumatic diseases (cases) and patients with osteoarthritis (controls). Between
1985 and 1993 we implanted 26 cementless hips in 22 patients with Rheumatoid
Arthritis, Psoriatic Arthritis or Ankylosing Spondylitis. From a pool of more
than 600 patients with Osteoarthritis we chose 40 matched controls (41 hips).
Matching variables were year of implantation, age, follow-up, height, weight,
gender and type of implant. At follow-up (cases: 58 +/- 27 months; controls: 56
+/- 26 Monate) no signs of loosening or migration of the stem were found, neither
in the cases nor in the controls. Loose and/or migrated cups were found in 4
patients with rheumatic diseases (after 44, 65, 65 and 107 months) and in 3
patients with osteoarthritis (after 63, 84 and 100 months). Two cups were revised
within 18 months in the control group, in the case group one revision was
necessary after 5 years. Loosening and revision rates did not differ
significantly (p > 0.20). Clinically, those with Osteoarthritis had a better
extension (p < 0.02), were more satisfied with their (artificial) hips (p < 0.05)
and did better in some activities of daily living (climbing stairs, dressing,
sitting/standing up). Within a mean follow-up of 5 years the results of patients 
with chronic rheumatic diseases seem to be comparable to those of a matched
control-group of patients with Osteoarthritis. Differences between the groups
concern areas, in which rheumatic patients are handicapped due to their chronic
illness. Nevertheless, we need long-term-results, before we can recommend
cementless implants for these patients.

PMID: 9697147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Rheumatol. 2007 Nov;26(11):1867-70. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Isoniazid intervention for latent tuberculosis among 86 patients with
rheumatologic disease administered with anti-TNFalpha.

Hanta I(1), Ozbek S, Kuleci S, Sert M, Kocabas A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Disease, Cukurova University, School of Medicine, Balcali,
01330, Adana, Turkey. ihanta@cu.edu.tr

In this study, we investigated the safety and toxicity of isoniazid (INH)
intervention therapy to the patients with latent tuberculosis who were given
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) for the treatment of their rheumatologic
diseases. In this prospective clinical study, we enrolled 86 patients receiving
anti-TNFalpha therapy for their rheumatologic diseases between April 2005 and
September 2006. Of all the subjects, 45 had rheumatoid arthritis, 36 had
ankylosing spondylitis, and 5 had psoriatic arthritis. In addition to
anti-TNFalpha therapy, 60 of the 86 patients were given INH intervention for
revealed latent tuberculosis. INH at a dosage of 300 mg daily was given for 9
months. Hepatotoxicity due to the INH therapy was considered when the serum
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and/or aspartate aminotransaminase (AST) levels
showed at least threefold increase with respect to their baseline serum levels.
Serum ALT and AST levels were measured by enzymatic colorimetric method in
fasting peripheral blood samples at 0 (baseline), 1, 2, 3, 6, and 9 months. Of 86
patients, 47 (54.7%) were women (mean age+/-SD, 44.1 +/- 10.9 years) and 39
(45.3%) were men (38.8 +/- 10.1 years). Except five patients (8.3%), liver
toxicity due to the INH therapy was not encountered among the patients, and after
temporarily discontinuing the INH therapy of these five subjects, serum
transaminase levels returned to the normal ranges. No hepatotoxicity was observed
in the non-INH group. However, there was no statistical significance between
INH-treated and non-INH-treated group (p = 0.317). In addition, none of the 86
patients developed active tuberculosis infection during the treatment period. In 
conclusion, for those patients who were assigned to the TNFalpha treatment for
their rheumatologic disorders and carrying risk for latent tuberculosis, INH
intervention therapy was found to be safe and efficacious.

PMID: 17332973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Rheumatol. 2007 Jun;34(6):1302-6. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Measuring dactylitis in clinical trials: which is the best instrument to use?

Healy PJ(1), Helliwell PS.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2007 Jun;34(6):1217-22.

OBJECTIVE: Until recently there were no validated tools to assess and measure
dactylitis, but a quasi-objective measure of dactylitis (the Leeds Dactylitis
Index, LDI, and a simplified version, the LDI basic) has now been developed. We
undertook an open-label observational trial to test the responsiveness of the LDI
and other measures previously used in clinical trials.
METHODS: Twenty-eight patients with a diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis (as
defined by the new ClASsification criteria for Psoriatic ARthritis, CASPAR) and
active disease including new-onset dactylitis were enrolled. The patients
underwent clinical assessment at baseline, 2 weeks, and 1, 3 and 6 months after
change of disease modifying therapy, usually to methotrexate. Comparator
dactylitis tools were taken from the literature and denoted IMPACT1 (Infliximab
Multinational Psoriatic Arthritis Controlled Trial), Clegg, and Salvarani.
RESULTS: All 5 measures of dactylitis showed significant change from baseline and
a large effect size (effect sizes first to last clinic visit: LDI 0.99, LDI basic
0.9, IMPACT1 1.63, Clegg 0.77, Salvarani 1.27). The correlation with clinical
measures was strongest for the IMPACT1 score, but all the indices except Clegg
had a significant positive relationship with tender joint counts, swollen joint
counts, Disease Activity Score 28, and patient and physician global measures.
When considering the 5 measures of dactylitis within the Outcome Measures in
Rheumatology [Clinical Trials] filter, the LDI and the LDI basic showed the best 
overall fit for the domains of truth, discrimination, and feasibility.
CONCLUSION: With the important points in its development examined, the LDI is now
ready to be used in larger randomized controlled trials both as an outcome
measure and to allow further assessment of its utility.

PMID: 17309128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Hand Surg Br. 2005 Feb;30(1):8-13.

Avanta versus Swanson silicone implants in the MCP joint--a prospective,
randomized comparison of 30 patients followed for 2 years.

Möller K(1), Sollerman C, Geijer M, Kopylov P, Tägil M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Sahlgrenska,
Göteborg, Sweden. karin.moller@lundbysjukhus.se

The results of Swanson and Avanta metacarpophalangeal joint arthroplasties in
rheumatoid patients were compared in a prospective, randomized study of 30
patients (120 implants). At 2-year follow-up, grip strength was measured, hand
function was assessed with the Sollerman test and the subjective outcome was
determined with visual analogue scores. With both implants ulnar deviation and
flexion deformities decreased, and there was no difference between the groups.
The increase in range of motion was 7 degrees greater with Avanta implants than
with Swanson implants. Grip strength and hand function were unaltered but the
visual analogue scales showed decreased pain levels and subjective improvements
in hand function, grip strength and cosmesis. Twenty-four of 30 patients were
satisfied. Fracture of the silicone spacer occurred with 12 Avanta (20%) and
eight Swanson implants (13%), with a higher fracture frequency in men.

PMID: 15620485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Br J Rheumatol. 1996 May;35(5):463-70.

Arthroscopic synovectomy in rheumatoid and psoriatic knee joint synovitis:
long-term outcome.

Fiocco U(1), Cozzi L, Rigon C, Chieco-Bianchi F, Baldovin M, Cassisi GA, Gallo C,
Doria A, Favaro MA, Piccoli A, de Candia A, Rubaltelli L, Todesco S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Padova, Italy.

A long-term prospective study was performed to evaluate the safety and long-term 
outcome of surgical arthroscopy (AS) for persistent rheumatoid (RA) and psoriatic
(PsA) knee joint synovitis (KJS). Local signs of joint inflammation (tenderness, 
swelling, "ballottement') and range of motion (ROM) were scored and the sum,
taken as a global outcome measure, was recorded in 17 RA and 18 PsA knees, both
before and at follow-up periods of 2, 6, 12, 24 and 36 months after surgical AS
(knee joint synovectomy; meniscal curettage, cartilage shaving or chondrectomy,
according to the degree of cartilage damage). A survival analysis (Kaplan-Meier) 
of the long-term outcome of surgical AS treatment and of the predictive value of 
clinical parameters of knee joint involvement was also performed. No intra- or
post-operative morbidity, pain worsening or loss of joint motion was observed and
all patients were discharged within 48 h. Comparison of the parameters of knee
joint evaluation showed a significant reduction of the signs of joint
inflammation and a significant increase in the ROM in all follow-up periods. At
36 months, the survival curves showed a 61.2% cumulative probability of clinical 
remission and 72.8% of definite improvement. No significant differences in the
prognostic importance of RA, compared to PsA diagnosis, were observed, although
higher percentages of PsA compared to RA knees (86.3% and 45.7% respectively)
reached the end point of clinical remission at 36 months. KJS duration,
radiographic severity and cartilage damage were not predictors of poor long-term 
outcome of AS synovectomy. Surgical AS treatment for PsA knees with more advanced
cartilage damage gave a better long-term outcome. A total of 50.7% of operated
knees reached the end point of a KJS relapse at 36 months, the majority (82%)
within the initial 18 months of follow-up. Our study indicates that AS
synovectomy is a safe procedure requiring short hospitalization which, in
combination with second-line medical treatment, can reduce local inflammation in 
RA and PsA KJS, and preserve knee joint ROM for up to 3 yr.

PMID: 8646438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Medicina (B Aires). 1995;55(3):231-6.

[Echocardiography in the evaluation of cardiac involvement in seronegative
spondylo-arthropathies].

[Article in Spanish]

de Almeida FA(1), Albanesi Filho FM, de Albuquerque EM, Magalhaes EC, de Menezes 
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario Pedro Ernesto, Universidad del
Estado de Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.

To evaluate the involvement of the heart in patients with seronegative
spondyloarthropathies by echodopplercardiography, 35 patients including 20 with
ankylosing spondylitis, 10 with Reiter's syndrome and 5 with psoriatic arthritis 
(21 men and 14 women, with ages ranging from 17-68 years and averaging 38.5) were
studied. Most were asymptomatic with respect to the cardiovascular system
(65.71%) and 12 oligosymptomatic with palpitations as their main complaint. Each 
patient had an echocardiogram and electrocardiogram. A two-dimensional
echocardiogram demonstrated alterations in 19 patients (54.29%), 28.58%
asymptomatic and 25.71% symptomatic. This study revealed most of lesions
(17/19-84.47%) followed by the Dopplerechocardiography (10/19-52.63%) and the
one-dimensional echocardiography (9/19-47.36%). Abnormal aortic valves were found
in 10 patients, in 7 thickenning and in 3 calcifications. The mitral valve was
involved in 11 patients, in 8 thickenning, in 1 calcification and in 2 valve
prolapse. In ankylosing spondylitis aortic valve disease was found in 8 patients.
Dopplerechocardiography evidenced the presence of aortic regurgitation in 4
patients and mitral insufficiency in 3. The Q-T interval was increased in 19
patients, there was one first degree auriculoventricular block, one right branch 
block and one sinus bradicardia. Thus the echocardiogram is an excellent
noninvasive method to disclose cardiac disturbances in patients with seronegative
spondyloarthropaties.

PMID: 8544721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Rheumatology (Oxford). 1999 Apr;38(4):316-20.

Chromosomal analysis of peripheral lymphocytes of patients before and after
radiation synovectomy with samarium-153 particulate hydroxyapatite.

O'Duffy EK(1), Oliver FJ, Chatters SJ, Walker H, Lloyd DC, Edwards JC, Ell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nuclear Medicine, University College London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Radiation synovectomy may be indicated for the treatment of chronic
synovitis. A number of factors may affect its current use, including
availability, limited evidence for its efficacy compared to intra-articular
glucocorticoid, and concerns regarding the potential long-term effects of
radiation exposure, particularly in younger patients. Specific chromosome-type
abnormalities in peripheral lymphocytes can be useful indicators of whole-body
radiation exposure. The frequency of these aberrations has been shown to increase
in patients who have had radiation synovectomy using yttrium-90 by up to five
times compared to baseline levels. Samarium-153 particulate hydroxyapatite
(Sm-153 PHYP) is a new radiopharmaceutical currently on trial which appears to
have less extra-articular leakage than yttrium-90 compounds. The aim of this
study was to identify any increase in specific chromosome-type abnormalities,
using published criteria, in patients following Sm-153 PHYP synovectomy of the
knee. The 10 patients (five men, five women) in whom the analyses were performed 
had a mean age of 47 yr (range 28-70 yr).
RESULTS: There was no increase in scored chromosome-type abnormalities after
Sm-153 PHYP synovectomy.
CONCLUSION: This study further supports the relative safety of Sm-153 PHYP
compared to other radiopharmaceuticals.

PMID: 10378707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Acta Derm Venereol. 2009;89(2):140-4. doi: 10.2340/00015555-0555.

Immunological and clinical effects of alphacalcidol in patients with psoriatic
arthropathy: results of an open, follow-up pilot study.

Gaál J(1), Lakos G, Szodoray P, Kiss J, Horváth I, Horkay E, Nagy G, Szegedi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Kenézy Gyula Hospital, Debrecen, Hungary.
gaalja@feemail.hu

The aim of this study was to describe the effect of systemic alphacalcidol (1 OH 
vitamin D3) treatment on clinical and immunological parameters in patients with
psoriatic arthropathy. Among the 19 patients investigated, 10 were treated with
0.25 microg oral alphacalcidol twice daily for 6 months, while 9 other patients
served as controls. In the peripheral blood of the treated group but not in the
controls, a statistically significant decrease was observed in the percentage of 
CD3/CD69-positive activated and CD8-positive interferon-gamma-producing T cells
and in the serum level of interferon-gamma during the first 3 months and also in 
the clinical activity of the disease during the whole 6-month follow-up period.
Our results show that systemic alphacalcidol treatment has an immunomodulatory
effect on patients with psoriatic arthropathy. This effect is manifested by a
short-term temporary decrease in type 1 immune responses and a continuous
decrease in disease activity.

PMID: 19325997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Rheumatol. 2007 Aug;34(8):1733-9. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

International spondyloarthritis interobserver reliability exercise--the INSPIRE
study: I. Assessment of spinal measures.

Gladman DD(1), Inman RD, Cook RJ, van der Heijde D, Landewé RB, Braun J, Davis
JC, Mease P, Brandt J, Vargas RB, Chandran V, Helliwell P, Kavanaugh A, O'Shea
FD, Khan MA, Pipitone N, Rahman P, Reveille JD, Stone MA, Taylor W, Veale DJ,
Maksymowych WP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the axial measures used in primary ankylosing
spondylitis (AS) were reproducible for both AS and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) with
axial disease.
METHODS: A group of 20 rheumatologists from 11 countries with expertise in
spondyloarthritis (SpA) met for a combined physical examination exercise to
assess 10 patients with PsA with axial involvement (9 men, 1 woman, mean age 52
yrs, mean disease duration 17 yrs) and 9 AS patients (7 men, 2 women, mean age 38
yrs, mean disease duration 16 yrs). A modified Latin-square design was used.
Measures included were occiput to wall, tragus to wall, cervical rotation, chest 
expansion, lateral spinal bending, modified Schober, and hip mobility. Data were 
analyzed using intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) adjusted for order of
measurements.
RESULTS: The majority of the variance was contributed by the patients. There was 
no order effect. Observer effect was noted especially for chest expansion for
both AS and PsA patients, and for the modified Schober in PsA. The ICC
demonstrated very good to excellent agreement for most measures for both AS and
PsA. Chest expansion provided only moderate agreement for AS and PsA.
CONCLUSION: Overall, measures of spinal mobility used in primary AS perform well 
with respect to interobserver reliability, and are equally reproducible when
applied to PsA patients with axial involvement. Thus, these measures should now
be evaluated in therapeutic trials of patients with PsA to determine sensitivity 
to change and concordance with other measures of structural damage.

PMID: 17611985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Rheumatol. 2003 Dec;30(12):2627-31.

Thalidomide for severe refractory ankylosing spondylitis: a 6-month open-label
trial.

Wei JC(1), Chan TW, Lin HS, Huang F, Chou CT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Chung Shan Medical
University, Sec. 1, 110 Chien Kuo N. Road, Taichung 402, Taiwan, China.
wei3228@ms3.hinet.net

OBJECTIVE: To examine the efficacy of thalidomide in the treatment of active
ankylosing spondylitis (AS) refractory to conventional therapies.
METHODS: In a 6-month open-label trial, we studied 13 men with different subtypes
of active AS: 3 juvenile AS, 9 adult AS, and one AS with psoriasis. All patients 
were resistant to conventional nonbiologic therapies including nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, sulfasalazine, and methotrexate. After 3 months'
observation on a preexisting regimen, oral thalidomide was added, starting at 100
mg/day for 1 week, then 200 mg/day for another 23 weeks. Outcome measures
included the Bath AS Disease Activity Index (BASDAI), Functional Index (BASFI),
Global Index (BAS-G), IgA, C-reactive protein (CRP), and eosinophil sedimentation
rate (ESR). Response to treatment was defined following the Ankylosing
Spondylitis Assessment criteria.
RESULTS: Three patients withdrew due to rash. Two patients were lost to followup 
due to lack of efficacy. Eight patients completed the trial. Four patients
attained > 50% improvement (2 juvenile AS, 1 peripheral AS, and 1 psoriatic
arthritis). Four patients attained > 20% improvement (2 axial and 2 peripheral
AS). Total response rate accordingly was 80% (8/10). Mean BASDAI improved
significantly from baseline to Week 24 (4.97 vs 3.1; p = 0.0156). Mean BASFI
improved from baseline to Week 24 (5.24 vs 3.06; p = 0.0078), and BAS-G from 6.02
to 3.21 (p = 0.0078). Significant laboratory improvements were found in ESR (from
69.5 to 34.2 mm/h; p = 0.0156), but not CRP (from 6.08 to 3.01 mg/dl; p = 0.078) 
or IgA (from 496 to 505 mg/dl; p = 0.375). Dry mouth, constipation, and dizziness
were common, but no severe adverse events were found.
CONCLUSION: Thalidomide is a promising treatment for patients with active AS who 
are resistant to conventional therapies other than biologics.

PMID: 14719205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Assoc Physicians India. 1998 Apr;46(4):345-50.

Association of HLA B27 antigen in Indian patients of ankylosing spondylitis and
other autoimmune diseases.

Kankonkar SR(1), Raikar SC, Joshi SV, Tijoriwala SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Typing Laboratory, Medical Research Center and Post Graduate Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Bombay Hospital, Mumbai 400 020.

One thousand three hundred and forty clinically suspected patients of Ankylosing 
Spondylitis (AS) and other autoimmune diseases and 5000 controls were studied to 
detect the association of HLA B27 antigen amongst them. Other alleles studied
include HLA B7, B40 (B60), B22(B55), B13, etc. Our findings show a considerable
and consistent association of HLA B27 with AS irrespective of the community to
which the patient, belonged his hygiene or socio-economic conditions. We also
found that people in the age group of 21-39 were the most vulnerable, when number
of affected individuals or severity of the disease were taken into consideration.
Male members showed a preponderance over females in HLA B27 positivity. Detection
of HLA B27 could help in the diagnosis of AS. Patients suffering from other
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, Reiter's syndrome
and uveitis and patients with inflammatory bowel disease, colitis, eczema,
bacillary or fungal infection were also found to be HLA B27 positive. A study of 
other alleles shows that even they sometimes associate AS and other autoimmune
diseases.

PMID: 11273314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Rheumatol. 2001 Jan;28(1):212.

Self-injection of gold and methotrexate.

Arthur V, Jubb R, Homer D.

Comment on
    J Rheumatol. 1993 Nov;20(11):1845-9.
    J Rheumatol. 1999 Feb;26(2):302-5.

PMID: 11196528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2007 Jun;46(6):994-8. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Compared clinical efficacy and bone metabolic effects of low-dose deflazacort and
methyl prednisolone in male inflammatory arthropathies: a 12-month open
randomized pilot study.

Saviola G(1), Abdi Ali L, Shams Eddin S, Coppini A, Cavalieri F, Campostrini L,
Sacco S, Bucci M, Cirino G, Rossini M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Unit, Salvatore Maugeri Foundation IRCCS,
46042 Castel Goffredo, Mantua, Italy. gsaviola@fsm.it

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate: (i) a correct equivalence ratio of clinical efficacy
between low-dose deflazacort (DFZ) and methyl prednisolone (MP); and (ii) bone
metabolic effects of low-dose DFZ and MP in the treatment of male RA and PsA.
METHODS: A total of 21 male patients with active RA or PsA, naive to steroid
treatment were chosen for the study. Group I: 10 patients treated for 6 months
with DFZ 7.5 mg, calcium, cholecalciferol and a DMARD; for the following 6 months
with MP 4 mg, calcium, cholecalciferol and a DMARD. Group II: 11 patients treated
for 6 months with MP 4 mg, calcium, cholecalciferol and a DMARD; for the
following 6 months with DFZ 7.5 mg, calcium, cholecalciferol and a DMARD. At day 
0, 90, 180, 240 and 360 evaluation of ACR improvement criteria; a blood sample
for total and bone-specific ALP, calcium, phosphorus, PTH, SHBG, estradiol, ACTH,
osteocalcin, LH, OPG; a sample of urine for calcium, phosphorus, creatinine and
DPD.
RESULTS: 13/21 patients (6/10 Group I; 7/11 Group II) reached ACR 20 at 6 months;
14/21 (7/10 Group I, 7/10 Group II) at 12 months. Only at the third month we
observed in Group II vs Group I a reduction of OPG (24% vs 6%, P = n.s.); ALP (P 
< 0.001) and osteocalcin (P = 0.006) decreased in both groups from the third
month; DPD decreased in both groups only from the sixth month (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: The correct equivalence ratio of DFZ to MP is 1.875:1, and of DFZ to
prednisolone 1.5:1. We found a relative prevalence of bone resorption compared to
bone formation in the first 6 months of treatment. The trend of OPG requires
further investigation.

PMID: 17384176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Rheumatol. 1997 Mar;24(3):470-6.

Home exercise and compliance in inflammatory rheumatic diseases--a prospective
clinical trial.

Stenström CH(1), Arge B, Sundbom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Malarsjukhuset, Eskilstuna, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To survey and to compare the one year effects of dynamic muscle
training and progressive muscle relaxation as home exercise for patients with
inflammatory rheumatic diseases; and to identify predictors for compliance with a
longterm home exercise regimen.
METHODS: Fifty-four patients (mean age 54 yrs, mean symptom duration 14 yrs) were
assessed for health related quality of life, exercise motivation, joint
tenderness, and physical capacities. After randomization into 2 groups, every
patient was instructed on one occasion in a 30 min program of either dynamic
training or muscle relaxation to carry out at home, 5 times a week during 3
months, and then 2-3 times a week for another 9 months.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients in each group completed the one year exercise
protocol, while 10 from each group did not. Compliance with the one year exercise
regimen seemed to be predicted by high self-efficacy for exercise, regular
range-of-motion exercises before the intervention, and being unmarried. After one
year, minor improvements in physical effect (p < or = 0.05) and work effect (p < 
or = 0.05) were found in the dynamic training group, while minor improvements in 
pain effect (p < or = 0.05), emotional reactions (p < or = 0.05), and arm
endurance (p < or = 0.01) were found in the muscle relaxation group. No
differences between the groups regarding changes in health status, joint
tenderness, or physical capacities during the intervention period were found.
CONCLUSION: These results may improve the selection of patients for home
exercise, and form a basis for improved administration of home exercise programs.

PMID: 9058651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Arthritis Rheum. 1991 Oct;34(10):1218-27.

The European Spondylarthropathy Study Group preliminary criteria for the
classification of spondylarthropathy.

Dougados M(1), van der Linden S, Juhlin R, Huitfeldt B, Amor B, Calin A, Cats A, 
Dijkmans B, Olivieri I, Pasero G, et al.

Author information: 
(1)René Descartes University, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 1991 Oct;34(10):1228-30.

Classification criteria for most of the disorders belonging to the
spondylarthropathy group already exist. However, the spectrum of
spondylarthropathy is wider than the sum of these disorders suggests.
Seronegative oligoarthritis, dactylitis or polyarthritis of the lower
extremities, heel pain due to enthesitis, and other undifferentiated cases of
spondylarthropathy have been ignored in epidemiologic studies because of the
inadequacy of existing criteria. In order to define classification criteria that 
also encompass patients with undifferentiated spondylarthropathy, we studied 403 
patients with all forms of spondylarthropathy and 674 control patients with other
rheumatic diseases. The diagnoses were based on the local clinical expert's
opinion. The 403 patients included 168 with ankylosing spondylitis, 68 with
psoriatic arthritis, 41 with reactive arthritis, 17 with inflammatory bowel
disease and arthritis, and 109 with unclassified spondylarthropathy. Based on
statistical analysis and clinical reasoning, we propose the following
classification criteria for spondylarthropathy: inflammatory spinal pain or
synovitis (asymmetric or predominantly in the lower limbs), together with at
least 1 of the following: positive family history, psoriasis, inflammatory bowel 
disease, urethritis, or acute diarrhea, alternating buttock pain, enthesopathy,
or sacroiliitis as determined from radiography of the pelvic region. These
criteria resulted in a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 87%. The proposed 
classification criteria are easy to apply in clinical practice and performed well
in all 7 participating centers. However, we regard them as preliminary until they
have been further evaluated in other settings.

PMID: 1930310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Gastroenterology. 1994 Jul;107(1):266-70.

Interstitial pneumonitis after low-dose methotrexate therapy in primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Sharma A(1), Provenzale D, McKusick A, Kaplan MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New England Medical Center Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Interstitial pneumonitis is an uncommon complication of low-dose methotrexate
therapy in patients with psoriasis but occurs in 3%-5% of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. We found a higher incidence of interstitial pneumonitis in 
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (14%) and describe its clinical
manifestations, treatment, and possible etiology. Blood tests, arterial blood gas
determinations, chest radiographs, bronchoscopy, tear production, autoantibody
tests, and serum immunoglobulin levels were obtained in six women who developed
interstitial pneumonitis while receiving methotrexate in a double-blind
prospective trial of methotrexate vs. colchicine in 87 patients with primary
biliary cirrhosis. Six of 43 patients (14%) who received methotrexate compared
with no patients receiving colchicine developed interstitial pneumonitis 19-61
weeks after starting treatment. The pneumonitis was characterized by dyspnea,
hypoxemia, and bilateral lung infiltrates, all of which responded within 24 hours
to the administration of intravenous glucocorticoids. There was no correlation
between the pneumonitis and pre-existing lung disease, the severity of the
primary biliary cirrhosis, the titer of antimitochondrial antibody, or other
diseases associated with primary biliary cirrhosis. Patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis receiving low-dose methotrexate (15 mg/wk) are more susceptible to
interstitial pneumonitis than patients with psoriasis or rheumatoid arthritis.
The pneumonitis appears to be a hypersensitivity reaction and responds rapidly to
intravenous glucocorticoid therapy.

PMID: 8020670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Clin Pharmacol. 2004 Nov;44(11):1244-51.

Absence of a clinically relevant interaction between etanercept and digoxin.

Zhou H(1), Parks V, Patat A, Le Coz F, Simcoe D, Korth-Bradley J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Wyeth Research, 500 Arcola Road, Collegeville, PA
19426, USA.

Etanercept, a soluble recombinant human tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFr), is
effective and well tolerated in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and psoriasis.
The primary objective of this study was to investigate the potential
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interaction between digoxin and etanercept at
steady state. In a crossover, open-label, nonrandomized, 3-period study, 12
healthy male subjects received loading oral doses of digoxin 0.5 mg every 12
hours on day 1 and 0.25 mg every 12 hours on day 2, followed by a daily
maintenance dose of 0.25 mg for a total of 27 days. Etanercept was administered
as a twice-weekly 25-mg subcutaneous dose beginning on day 9 and continuing up to
day 37 for a total of 9 doses. All ratios of maximum plasma concentration
(C(max)) and area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) for
pharmacokinetics of digoxin fell within the confidence interval of 0.8 to 1.25.
Although not considered clinically relevant, the mean C(max) and AUC of
etanercept were 4.2% and 12.5% lower, respectively, when etanercept was given
with digoxin than when administered alone. There were no clinically relevant
changes in the electrocardiogram (ECG) parameters, and adverse events did not
increase when both drugs were combined. In conclusion, there is no clinically
relevant interaction between etanercept and digoxin, and both drugs can be safely
coadministered without the need for a dosage adjustment.

PMID: 15496642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Rheumatol. 2007 Aug;34(8):1740-5.

International spondyloarthritis interobserver reliability exercise--the INSPIRE
study: II. Assessment of peripheral joints, enthesitis, and dactylitis.

Gladman DD(1), Inman RD, Cook RJ, Maksymowych WP, Braun J, Davis JC, Landewé RB, 
Mease P, Brandt J, Vargas RB, Chandran V, Helliwell P, Kavanaugh A, O'Shea FD,
Khan MA, Pipitone N, Rahman P, Reveille JD, Stone MA, Taylor W, Veale DJ, van der
Heijde D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Prognosis Studies in the Rheumatic Diseases, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. dafna.gladman@utoronto.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the assessments of peripheral joints and
enthesitis were reproducible for both AS and PsA with axial disease, and whether 
dactylitis assessment is reproducible in patients with PsA.
METHODS: A group of 20 rheumatologists from 11 countries with expertise in
spondyloarthritis (SpA) met for a combined physical examination exercise to
assess 10 patients with PsA with axial involvement (9 men, 1 woman, mean age 52
yrs, disease duration 17 yrs) and 9 patients with AS (7 men, 2 women, mean age 38
yrs, disease duration 16 yrs). A modified Latin-square design that enabled
assessment of patient, assessor, and order effect was used. Measures included
were number of tender and swollen joints, presence of enthesitis using 6
different indices, and dactylitis score. Data were analyzed using intraclass
correlation (ICC) adjusted for order of measurements.
RESULTS: The majority of the variance was contributed by the patients. There was 
no order effect. The assessment of tender joints (ICC 0.69) was more reliable
than the assessment of swollen joints (ICC 0.54). Moreover, there was better
agreement in patients with PsA (ICC 0.78) than in patients with AS (ICC 0.62).
There was excellent agreement on the number of active enthesitis sites (ICC
0.86). All the enthesitis indices provided substantial to excellent agreement
among observers. Agreement for the dactylitis score was substantial (ICC 0.70).
CONCLUSION: The assessment of peripheral joints is more reliable in patients with
PsA. Enthesitis instruments can be used reliably in patients with AS and patients
with PsA with spinal involvement. The Leeds dactylitis instrument functions well 
in PsA.

PMID: 17659754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Rev Rhum Mal Osteoartic. 1990 Nov;57(11):815-9.

[Severe psoriatic rheumatism. Treatment with azathioprine. Report of 11 cases].

[Article in French]

Le Quintrec JL(1), Menkès CJ, Amor B.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie A, Hôpital Cochin, Pais.

PMID: 2291073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1132:300-4. doi: 10.1196/annals.1405.028.

Etanercept treatment in myasthenia gravis.

Rowin J(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation,
Section of Neuromuscular Disease, Neuropsychiatric Institute, Chicago IL.
60612-7330, USA. rowin@uic.edu

Etanercept is a tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blocking agent that has been shown to
suppress ongoing experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG). This
subcutaneously administered TNF blocking agent has also been shown to be safe and
effective in several rheumatological diseases including rheumatoid arthritis,
psoriasis, and ankylosing spondylitis. A prospective clinical pilot trial of
etanercept in corticosteroid-dependent autoimmune myasthenia gravis (MG) patients
supports further study into etanercept as a treatment for MG.

PMID: 18567881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Nov 15;43(10):e95-100. Epub 2006 Oct 16.

Emergence of Legionella pneumophila pneumonia in patients receiving tumor
necrosis factor-alpha antagonists.

Tubach F(1), Ravaud P, Salmon-Céron D, Petitpain N, Brocq O, Grados F, Guillaume 
JC, Leport J, Roudaut A, Solau-Gervais E, Lemann M, Mariette X, Lortholary O;
Recherce Axée sur la Tolérance des Biothérapies Group.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7, Faculté de Medecine, Paris, France.
florence.tubach@bch.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Patients treated with tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
antagonists have an increased risk of infection, but infection due to Legionella 
pneumophila has rarely been described in patients receiving such therapy.
METHODS: A registry involving 486 clinical departments in France was designed by 
a multidisciplinary group (Recherche Axée sur la Tolérance des Biothérapies
[RATIO]) to collect data on opportunistic and severe infections occurring in
patients treated with TNF-alpha antagonists. All cases are reported to RATIO in
accordance with national health authorities and validated by infectious disease
experts. The legionellosis rate among patients treated with TNF-alpha antagonists
was compared with the rate in France overall.
RESULTS: We report a 1-year consecutive series of 10 cases of L. pneumophila
pneumonia in France in 2004, including 6 cases treated with adalimumab, 2 treated
with etanercept, and 2 treated with infliximab. The median patient age was 51
years (range, 40-69 years). Eight patients were treated for rheumatoid arthritis,
1 was treated for cutaneous psoriasis, and 1 was treated for pyoderma
gangrenosum. The median duration of TNF-alpha antagonist treatment at onset of
infection was 38.5 weeks (range, 3-73 weeks). Eight patients were receiving
concomitant treatment with corticosteroids, and 6 were receiving treatment with
methotrexate. The relative risk of legionellosis when receiving treatment with a 
TNF-alpha antagonist, compared with the relative risk in France overall, was
estimated to be between 16.5 and 21.0. We also report a second episode of
confirmed legionellosis following the reintroduction of infliximab therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: L. pneumophila pneumonia is a potentially severe but curable
infection that might complicate anti-TNF-alpha therapy. In patients receiving
anti-TNF-alpha who develop pneumonia, legionellosis should be systematically
investigated, and first-line antibiotic therapy should be efficient against L.
pneumophila.

PMID: 17051484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2004 May;43(5):658-61. Epub 2004 Feb 24.

SAPHO syndrome treated with pamidronate: an open-label study of 10 patients.

Amital H(1), Applbaum YH, Aamar S, Daniel N, Rubinow A.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Hadassah Ein-Karem, Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. amitalh@haddassah.org.il

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2005 Jan;44(1):137; author reply 137-8.

BACKGROUND: In recent years the SAPHO syndrome (synovitis, acne, pustulosis,
hyperostosis and osteitis) has been encountered more frequently. However,
clinical evidence indicating superiority of a specific therapeutic modality is
still absent. Pamidronate, a second-generation bisphosphonate, has a pronounced
effect on bone metabolism by suppressing bone resorption. We report our clinical 
experience with intravenous pamidronate in SAPHO syndrome.
METHODS: Between the years 1999 and 2003 we treated 10 patients with the SAPHO
syndrome who did not respond to NSAIDs, oral corticosteroids, colchicine,
methotrexate, sulphasalazine or infliximab. All patients were treated with 60 mg 
pamidronate, given intravenously within an hour. In cases of no response a
subsequent dose was given within a month and if there was a partial response an
additional infusion was given after 4 months. The primary endpoint was the
disappearance of recurrent bouts of bone pain, osteitis or hyperostosis, or
recurrent synovitis. Reduction of the frequency of attacks by 50% was regarded as
a partial response.
RESULTS: Seven of the patients were females and three were males. The age at
diagnosis ranged from 26 to 68 yr. All patients had axial or peripheral arthritis
and cutaneous involvement; three had severe acne, eight had pustulosis and two
had concomitant psoriasis vulgaris. Hyperostosis of the anterior chest wall
involving either sternocostal or sternoclavicular joints, as seen on technetium
99 bone scintigraphy, was detected in all patients. Complete remission was
observed following therapy in six patients, three others partially responded and 
only one patient had no response. Two patients needed four cycles of pamidronate 
infusion, one patient needed three, six needed two infusions and one patient
remitted following a single pamidronate infusion. In all but one patient
pamidronate was effective in preventing recurrent bouts of pustulosis.
CONCLUSION: Pamidronate seems to be a very effective mode of therapy for patients
with the SAPHO syndrome, by promoting remission in all components of the
disorder, such as bone, joint and skin involvement, and ceases the bouts that
characterize this disorder.

PMID: 14983108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

